IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

1

Survey on Large Language Model-Enhanced
Reinforcement Learning: Concept, Taxonomy, and
Methods

arXiv:2404.00282v3 [cs.LG] 30 Oct 2024

Yuji Cao, Huan Zhao, Member, IEEE, Yuheng Cheng, Student Member, IEEE, Ting Shu, Yue Chen,
Member, IEEE, Guolong Liu, Member, IEEE, Gaoqi Liang, Member, IEEE, Junhua Zhao, Senior Member, IEEE,
Jinyue Yan, Yun Li, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—With extensive pre-trained knowledge and high-level
general capabilities, large language models (LLMs) emerge as a
promising avenue to augment reinforcement learning (RL) in aspects such as multi-task learning, sample efficiency, and high-level
task planning. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review
of the existing literature in LLM-enhanced RL and summarize
its characteristics compared to conventional RL methods, aiming
to clarify the research scope and directions for future studies.
Utilizing the classical agent-environment interaction paradigm,
we propose a structured taxonomy to systematically categorize
LLMs’ functionalities in RL, including four roles: information
processor, reward designer, decision-maker, and generator. For
each role, we summarize the methodologies, analyze the specific
RL challenges that are mitigated, and provide insights into future
directions. Lastly, comparative analysis of each role, potential
applications, prospective opportunities and challenges of the
LLM-enhanced RL are discussed. By proposing this taxonomy, we
aim to provide a framework for researchers to effectively leverage
LLMs in the RL field, potentially accelerating RL applications in
complex applications such as robotics, autonomous driving, and
energy systems.
Index Terms—Reinforcement learning (RL), large language
models (LLM), vision-language models (VLM), multimodal RL,
LLM-enhanced RL.

I. I NTRODUCTION

Corresponding author: Huan Zhao, Junhua Zhao.
Yuji Cao and Yue Chen are with the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 999077, China (email: yjcao@mae.cuhk.edu.hk,
yuechen@mae.cuhk.edu.hk)
Huan Zhao and Jinyue Yan are with the Department of Building Environment and Energy Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, 100872, China (email: huan-paul.zhao@polyu.edu.hk, jjerry.yan@polyu.edu.hk)
Yuheng Cheng, Guolong Liu, and Junhua Zhao are with the School of
Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
518172, China, and also with the Center for Crowd Intelligence, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society (AIRS),
Shenzhen, 518129, China (email: yuhengcheng@link.cuhk.edu.cn, liuguolong@cuhk.edu.cn, zhaojunhua@cuhk.edu.cn)
Ting Shu is with Guangdong-Hongkong-Macao Greater Bay Area Weather
Research Center for Monitoring Warning and Forecasting (Shenzhen Institute of Meteorological Innovation), Shenzhen, 518125, China. (email:
shuting@gbamwf.com)
Gaoqi Liang is with the School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China (e-mail: lianggaoqi@hit.edu.cn)
Yun Li is with the Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, 518110, China, and
also with i4AI Ltd., WC1N 3AX London, U.K (email: Yun.Li@ieee.org)

R

EINFORCEMENT learning (RL) is a powerful learning
paradigm that focuses on control and decision-making,
where an agent learns to optimize a specified target through
trial and error interactions with the environment. Traditional
RL methods, however, often struggled with high-dimensional
state spaces and complex environments [1]. The integration
of deep learning techniques with RL, known as deep RL, has
led to significant breakthroughs. In 2015, Deep Q-Networks
(DQN) [2] marked a turning point, demonstrating human-level
performance on Atari games using raw pixel inputs. Subsequent innovations such as proximal policy optimization [3]
and soft actor-critic [4] have further expanded the capabilities
of deep RL. In different realms, deep RL algorithms have
achieved promising performance, such as real-time strategy
games [5], [6], board games [7], [8], energy management [9]
and imperfect information games [10], [11]. Concurrent advancements in natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV) [12], [13], have fostered new RL paradigms,
such as language-conditional RL [14], which uses natural
language to instruct agents, and vision-based RL [15], where
agents learn from high-dimensional visual inputs.
The integration of language and vision capabilities into deep
RL has introduced new challenges, as the agent has to learn
the high-dimensional features and a control policy jointly. To
reduce the burden of visual feature learning, reference [16] decoupled representation learning from RL. To handle languageinvolved tasks, a survey [17] called for potential uses of NLP
techniques in RL. Nevertheless, the capabilities of language
models were limited at that time and the following four challenges still have not been addressed: 1) Sample inefficiency:
Language and vision tasks involve large, complex state-action
spaces, making it challenging for RL agents to learn effective
policies. Moreover, agents must understand tasks and connect
them to corresponding states, necessitating even more extensive interactions [18], [19], [20]. 2) Reward function design: In
language and vision tasks, designing effective reward functions
is particularly challenging. These functions must capture subtle
linguistic nuances and complex visual features, significantly
increasing the complexity of an already difficult process.
Moreover, aligning rewards with high-level task objectives in
these domains often requires domain expertise and extensive
trial-and-error [21], [22], [1], [23]. 3) Generalization: RL
agents often overfit to training data, especially in vision-based
environments, leading to poor performance when deployed in

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

states with interventions (e.g., added noise). Agents must learn
invariant features robust to such interventions, enabling generalization across varied linguistic contexts and visual scenes.
However, the complexity of these domains makes extracting
such features and adapting to new environments particularly
challenging [24], [25]. 4) Natural language understanding:
deep RL faces difficulties in natural language processing and
understanding scenarios, where the nuances and complexities
of human language present unique challenges that are not
adequately addressed by current RL methodologies [26].
The field of NLP has undergone a revolutionary transformation since the introduction of the Transformer architecture
in 2017 [12]. This breakthrough paved the way for the development of Large Language Models (LLMs), with landmark
models such as BERT [27], GPT [28], and more recent iterations such as GPT-3 [29] and PaLM [30] marking significant
milestones. The emergence of these LLMs has demonstrated
powerful capabilities across various real-world applications,
including medicine [31], chemical research [32], energy system [33], [34], [35] and embodied control in robotics [36].
These models have not only advanced the field of NLP but
also shown remarkable potential in tackling complex, multidisciplinary challenges. Compared to small language models,
LLMs have emergent capabilities that are not present in small
language models [37], such as in-context learning [38], reasoning ability [39] etc. Additionally, leveraging the vast amounts
of training data, pre-trained LLMs are equipped with a broad
spectrum of world knowledge [40]. Benefiting from these
capabilities, the applications of language models have been
shifted from language modeling to task-solving, ranging from
basic text classification and sentiment analysis to complex
high-level task planning [41] and decision-making [42], [43].
With emergent capabilities, the potential of LLMs to address
the inherent challenges of RL has recently gained popularity [44], [45]. The capabilities of LLMs, particularly in
natural language understanding, reasoning, and task planning,
provide a unique approach to solving the above-mentioned
RL issues. For sample inefficiency, reference [46] proposed
a framework where LLMs can be employed to improve the
sample efficiency of RL agents by providing rich, contextually
informed predictions or suggestions, thereby reducing the need
for extensive environment interactions. For reward function
design, LLMs can aid in constructing more nuanced and
effective reward functions, enhancing the learning process by
offering a deeper understanding of complex scenarios [47]. For
generalization, reference [48] proposed a framework that leverages language-based feedback for improving the generalization
of RL policy in unseen environments. For natural language
understanding, Pang et al. [49] used LLMs to translate
complex natural language-based instructions to simple taskspecified languages for RL agents. These works show that
LLM is a promising and powerful role that can contribute to
the longstanding RL challenges.
Despite the advancements in the domain of integrating
LLMs into the RL paradigm, there is currently a notable
absence of comprehensive review in this rapidly evolving area.
Additionally, though various methods are proposed to integrate
LLMs into the RL paradigm, there is no unified framework for

2

such integration. Our survey paper seeks to fill these gaps by
providing an extensive review of the related literature, defining
the scope of the novel paradigm called LLM-enhanced RL, and
further proposing a taxonomy to categorize the functionalities
of LLMs in the proposed paradigm.
A. Contributions
This survey makes the following contributions:
LLM-enhanced RL paradigm: This paper presents the first
comprehensive review in the emerging field of integrating
LLM into the RL paradigm. To clarify the research scope
and direction for future works, we define the term LLMenhanced RL to encapsulate this class of methodologies,
summarize the characteristics and provide a corresponding framework that clearly illustrates 1) how to integrate
LLMs in classical agent-environment interaction and 2)
the multifaceted enhancements that LLMs offer to the
conventional RL paradigm.
• Unified taxonomy: Further classifying the functionalities
of LLMs in the LLM-enhanced RL paradigm, we propose
a structured taxonomy to systematically categorize LLMs
within the classical agent-environment paradigm, where
LLMs are classified as information processors, reward
designers, decision-makers, and generators. By such a
categorization, a clear view of how LLMs integrate into
the classical RL paradigm is offered.
• Algorithmic review: For each role of LLM, we review
emerging works in this direction and discuss different
algorithmic characteristics from the perspective of capabilities. Based on this foundation, future applications,
opportunities, and challenges of LLM-enhanced RL are
analyzed to provide a potential roadmap for advancing
this interdisciplinary field.
•

B. Text Organization
The remaining sections are organized as follows. Section II provides foundational knowledge of both RL and
LLM. Section III presents the concept of LLM-enhanced
RL and provides its overall framework. Following this, Sections IV, V, VI, and VII offer an in-depth analysis of LLMs
within the RL context, exploring their roles as information
processor, reward designer, decision-maker, and generator,
respectively. Last, Section VIII discusses the application,
opportunities and challenges of LLM-enhanced RL. Finally,
Section IX concludes the survey.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide a concise overview of the classical RL paradigm and related challenges. Next, we explore the
prevailing trend in RL—specifically, the fusion of multimodal
data sources, including language and visual information. Following this, we offer an introductory background on LLMs and
outline the key capabilities that can enhance the RL learning
paradigm.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

A. Background of Reinforcement Learning
1) Classical Reinforcement Learning: In a classical RL
paradigm shown in Fig. 1, the agent interacts with an environment through a trial-and-error process to maximize the
specified rewards in the trajectory. In each step, the agent
takes an action a based on the observed state s from the
environment. By optimizing the policy π (action controller),
the agent maximizes the cumulative rewards. Such an optimization problem is usually formalized through the concept
of Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined by the quintuple
⟨S, A, T , R, γ⟩. Here, S denotes a set comprising all possible
states, A denotes a set of all possible actions, T represents the
state transition probability function T : S × A × S → [0, 1],
R is a reward function R : S × A × S → R, and γ (with
0 ≤ γ ≤ 1) is the discount factor. The objective in RL is to
optimize the policy π(a|s) such that the cumulative returns
P
∞
k
k=0 γ rk+1 is maximized.
Reward
Agent
Policy
controller

Action

Environment

Observed state

Fig. 1. Classical reinforcement learning paradigm.

2) Challenges of Reinforcement Learning: While RL
algorithms have made remarkable performance in recent
years [2], [7], [50], there are still several longstanding challenges that limit the real-world applicability of RL:
• Generalization in Unseen Environment: Generalization in
unseen environments remains a significant challenge in
the field of RL [51]. The core issue lies in the ability of
RL algorithms to transfer learned knowledge or behaviors
to new, previously unseen environments. RL models are
often trained in simulated or specific settings, excelling
in those scenarios but struggling to maintain performance
when faced with novel or dynamic conditions. This
limitation hinders the practical application of RL in realworld situations, where environments are rarely static or
perfectly predictable. Achieving generalization requires
models to not only learn specific task solutions but also
to understand underlying principles that can be adapted
to a range of situations.
• Reward Function Design: Reward function is the principal contributing factor to the performance of an RL agent.
Despite their fundamental importance, reward functions
are known to be notoriously difficult to design, especially
in contexts involving sparse reward environments and
complex scenarios [1]. In sparse reward settings, where
feedback is limited, reward shaping becomes essential
to guide agents toward meaningful behaviors; however,
this introduces the risk of inadvertently biasing the agent
towards sub-optimal policies or overfitting to specific
scenarios [52], [53]. Conversely, for complex tasks, highperformance reward functions usually require massive

3

manual trial-and-error since most designed rewards are
sub-optimal [23] or lead to unintended behavior [54].
• Compounding Error in Model-based Planning: Modelbased RL is prone to the issue of compounding errors
during planning. As the prediction horizon extends, errors
in the model’s predictions accumulate, leading to significant deviations from optimal trajectories [55], [56]. This
problem is particularly acute in complex environments
with high-dimensional state spaces. With their advanced
predictive capabilities and understanding of sequential
dependencies, LLMs could help mitigate these errors,
leading to more accurate and reliable planning in modelbased RL.
• Multi-task Learning: Multi-task RL faces several key
challenges that limit its effectiveness. One major issue is
managing varying task difficulties, where simpler tasks
can overshadow learning of more complex ones, leading
to negative transfer [57]. Task interference is another
critical problem, as shared parameters or data between
tasks can result in suboptimal performance on individual
tasks [58]. Determining optimal parameter-sharing strategies is complex, as it must balance learning efficiency
with task-specific requirements [59]. Sample efficiency
remains a significant hurdle, with traditional data-sharing
approaches not fully leveraging learned behaviors across
tasks [60]. Finally, effectively transferring knowledge
between tasks without negative interference is an ongoing
challenge that impacts the agent’s ability to accelerate
learning across multiple objectives [61].
3) Multimodal Reinforcement Learning: With the advances
in both CV and NLP, pattern recognition in vision and natural
language has become increasingly powerful, and multimodal
data has been involved in the RL paradigm recently. Visual
data is commonly involved in the observation space of RL
when agents receive image-based information from the environment, e.g. in applications such as robots [62], video game
control [2] etc. Compared to visual data, natural languages
are usually included when RL agents are given specific tasks
when interacting with the environments. The use of natural
languages in RL can be divided into the following two
categories [17]:
Language-conditional RL: In language-conditional RL,
the problem itself requires the agent to interact with
the environment through language. Specifically, there are
two ways to integrate natural language in RL: 1) task
description: the task or instruction is described in natural
languages, e.g. instruction following, where the agents
learn to interpret the instructions first and then execute
actions; 2) action space or observation space: natural
language is part of the state and action space, e.g.. text
games, dialogue systems, and question answering (Q&A).
This class of RL leverages natural language as a direct
component of the RL process, guiding the agent’s actions
and decisions within the language environment.
• Language-assisted RL: In language-assisted RL, natural
language is used to facilitate learning but not as a
part of problem formulation. Two usages of language-

•

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

assisted RL are: 1) communicating domain knowledge:
the text containing task-related information can be helpful
for agents. Therefore, wikis and manuals related to the
environment can potentially assist the agents in such
cases; 2) structuring policies: structuring policies is to
communicate information about the state or dynamics
of the environment based on language instead of representations of the environment or models. In such cases,
language can be leveraged to shape representations towards a generalizable abstraction, such as using “avoid
hitting the wall” instead of representations of a policy.
This approach represents a more indirect use of natural
language, serving as a guide or enhancer to the primary
RL tasks.
The integration of multimodal data challenges the RL
paradigm since the agent has to simultaneously learn how to
process complex multimodal data and optimize the control
policy in the environment [16]. Issues such as natural language understanding [63] and visual-based reward function
design [64] require to be addressed.
B. Background of Large Language Models
LLMs typically refer to the Transformer-based language
models [65] containing billions of parameters and being
trained on massive text data (i.e., several terabytes (TB)
scale) [66], such as GPT-3 [29] and LLaMA [67]. The extensive number of parameters and internet-scale training data
enable LLMs to master a diverse array of tasks, resulting
in enhanced capabilities in language generation, knowledge
representation, and logical reasoning, as well as improved
generalization to novel tasks.
The development and effectiveness of LLMs are largely
driven by Scaling Laws, i.e., as these models grow in size
– both in terms of their parameter count and the data they
are trained on – they tend to exhibit emergent abilities that
are not present in small models [68], [69], [70], such as
in-context learning, reasoning, and generalization. Here, we
briefly introduce such capabilities of LLMs in detail:
• In-context Learning: In-context learning capability eliminates the need for explicit model retraining or gradient
update [29], as it can generate better responses or perform
tasks by inputs cueing examples or related knowledge.
Specifically, task-related texts are included in the prompts
as context information, helping the LLMs to understand
the situations and execute instructions.
• Instruction Following: Leveraging diverse task-specific
datasets formatted with natural language descriptions
(also called instruction tuning), LLMs are shown to
perform well on unseen tasks that are also described
in the form of natural language [71], [72], [73]. Therefore, this capability equips LLMs with the ability to
comprehend instructions for new tasks and effectively
generalize across tasks not previously encountered, even
in the absence of explicit examples.
• Step-by-step Reasoning: For smaller models, tackling
multi-step tasks, such as solving math word problems,
often proves to be challenging. However, large language

4

models can address the complex task effectively with sophisticated prompting strategies such as Chain of Thought
(CoT) [74], Tree of Thought (ToT) [75], and Graph
of Thought (GoT) [76]. These strategies structure the
problem-solving process into sequential or hierarchical
steps, facilitating a more articulated and understandable
reasoning pathway. Additionally, prompts designed for
planning enable LLMs to output sequences that reflect
a progression of thoughts or actions, proving invaluable
for tasks demanding logical sequence or decision-making
outputs.
III. L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL -E NHANCED
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
A. Definition
RL agents are often tasked with making robust and deliberate decisions using multimodal information in real-real
applications, whether in the MDP setting or within the context
of specific task descriptions. Examples include robots designed
to follow natural language instructions while navigating physical environments or visual games with tasks described in
natural language [77], [78], [79]. However, it is challenging for
conventional RL methods as the agent is required to simultaneously interpret complex multimodal data and optimize control
policies amidst ever-changing environments [80]. Compounding these challenges are issues like sample inefficiency, the
difficulty of crafting reward functions that accurately reflect
multimodal inputs, and the need for robust generalization
across varied tasks and settings.
The rapid advancements in LLMs present a viable solution
to these challenges, thanks to their potent natural language
understanding and reasoning abilities, coupled with recent
progress in incorporating visual data processing [81]. This dual
capability enables LLMs to interpret and act upon complex
multimodal information effectively, serving as a robust helper
for enhancing the RL paradigm for real-world applications.
Nevertheless, despite the powerful functionalities of LLMs,
the current studies are varied and lack a standard concept
correctly specifying the systematic methodology, which impedes the advancement of research in this area. Therefore, we
introduce the concept called LLM-enhanced RL as follows:
LLM-enhanced RL refers to the methods that utilize the
multimodal information processing, generating, reasoning,
and other high-level cognitive capabilities of pre-trained,
knowledge-inherent LLM models to assist the RL paradigm.
LLM-enhanced RL differs from traditional model-based RL
by leveraging knowledge-rich LLM models. This approach
provides two key advantages: First, LLM equips the agent
with substantial pre-trained capabilities at the beginning of
the learning process, such as reasoning and high-level planning, etc. Second, it offers superior generalization capabilities.
Pre-trained on diverse data, LLMs can effectively transfer
knowledge across domains, enabling better adaptation to unseen environments than conventional data-driven models. Last,
LLM-enhanced RL addresses a key limitation of pre-trained
models: their inability to interact with environments to expand
their knowledge and ground themselves in specific domains.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

Information Processor

Extracted
Representation

Reward Designer

Generator

Agent

Specification
Language
LLM as
Information
Processor

LLM as
Reward
Designer

5

LLM as
World Model
Simulator

LLM as
Decisionmaker

Model Simulator

Policy Interpreter

Real
World

Policy

Sim.
World

World Model

Interpretation

Decision-maker
State

Reward

Model

Action

Reward Model

Action-making

Action-guiding

Trajectory

Code
Generation

Env

LLM as
Policy
Interpreter

Sequence
Modelling

Action
Candidates
Expert
Actions

Fig. 2. Framework of LLM-enhanced RL in classical Agent-Environment interactions, where LLM plays different roles in enhancing RL.

Through environmental interactions, this approach generates
task-specific data, grounds the LLM in particular domains
by in-context learning, and eventually helps them adapt to
dynamic changes with continuous learning.
B. Framework
The framework of LLM-enhanced RL is illustrated in the
center of Fig. 2, which is founded on the classical agentenvironment interaction paradigm. Along with the trial-anderror learning process, LLM processes the state information,
redesigns the reward, assists in action selection, and interprets
the policy after the action selection.
Specifically, on the one hand, when the agent receives the
state and reward information from the environment, LLM
is able to process or modify the information to either filter
unnecessary natural language-based information or design appropriate rewards to accelerate the learning process, based on
the natural language understanding and reasoning capabilities.
On the other hand, when the agent is about to choose an
action based on the observation, LLM can assist the action
selection process by either simulating a world model or serving
as the policy network to generate reasonable actions based
on the modeling capability and common-sense knowledge.
Additionally, after the action selection process, integrating
state, reward, and action information, LLM can interpret the
underlying possible reasons behind the policy selection, which
helps human supervisors understand the scenarios for further
system optimization.
Based on the functions of LLM in the framework, we extract
characteristics of LLM-enhanced RL and further divide four
different LLM roles in LLM-enhanced RL, including information processor, reward designer, generator, and decision-maker,
which will be elaborated in the next subsections.
C. Characteristics
The LLM-enhanced RL paradigm enhances the vanilla RL
paradigm with the following characteristics:
• Multimodal Information Understanding: LLMs enhance RL agents’ comprehension of scenarios involving

multimodal information, enabling them to learn from
tasks or environments described in natural language and
vision data more effectively.
• Multi-task Learning and Generalization: Benefiting
from the multi-disciplinary pre-trained knowledge and
powerful sequence modeling capability, LLMs empower
RL agents by providing a high-capacity model capable
of accommodating task variances and transferring knowledge across multiple tasks, assisting in handling multiple
tasks.
• Improved Sample Efficiency: Given the inherent exploratory nature, the RL paradigm demands significant
samples to learn. Pre-trained LLM can enhance data
generation by simulation or leverage the prior knowledge
to improve the sample efficiency of RL.
• Long-Horizon Handling: RL becomes more challenging
as the length of trajectory increases, due to the credit assignment problem. LLMs can decompose complex tasks
down into sub-tasks to assist RL agents in planning
over longer temporal horizons, aiding in the decisionmaking process for complex, multi-step tasks such as the
Minecraft game.
• Reward Signal Generation: Based on the context understanding and domain knowledge, LLMs contribute to
the reward shaping and reward function designing, which
help guide the RL towards effective policy learning in
sparse-reward environments.
D. Taxonomy
In this subsection, we illustrate the different roles of LLMs
within the above framework, by detailing their functions and
corresponding issues of RL they address:
• Information Processor: When observation or task description involves language or visual features, it is challenging for the agent to comprehend the complex information and optimize the control policy simultaneously.
To release the agent from the burden of understanding
the multimodal data, LLM can serve as an information
processor for environment information or task instruction

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

information by 1): extracting meaningful feature representations for speeding up network learning; 2) translating natural language-based environment information
or task instruction information into formal specific task
languages to reduce learning complexity.
Application example: In instruction-following RL for
robots, tasks can have unbounded natural language forms
due to users’ diverse speaking habits, which can impede
RL learning performance. LLMs transform these varied
natural language instructions into a unique task language,
enabling more robust RL performance [49].
• Reward Designer: In complex task environments where
the reward is sparse or a high-performance reward function is hard to define, using the prior world knowledge,
reasoning abilities, and code generation ability, LLM can
serve as two roles: 1) an implicit reward model to provide
reward values based on the environment information, either by training or prompting; 2) an explicit reward model
that generates executable codes of reward functions that
transparently specifies the logical calculation process of
reward scalars based on the environment specifications
and language-based instructions or goals.
Application example: For complex robotic control problems, such as dexterous manipulation, reward design
requires both expertise and trial and error. LLM designs
reward functions based on knowledge and iteratively
improves it based on the performance [82].
• Decision-maker: RL faces challenges such as sample
inefficiency and exploration inefficiency. To address these
challenges, LLMs can be leveraged as decision-makers
in RL, offering promising solutions through two main
approaches: 1) action-making: LLMs treat offline RL
as a sequence modeling problem, using rewards for the
conditional generation of actions. Pretrained on diverse,
internet-scale data, LLMs possess advanced semantic
understanding capabilities, which can be exploited to
accelerate offline RL learning. 2) action-guiding: LLMs
act as expert instructors to produce a reduced set of
action candidates or expert actions. The action candidates
constrain the original action space, thereby enhancing
exploration efficiency. Expert actions encapsulate prior
knowledge from LLMs. When incorporated to regularize
the policy learning, this expert knowledge is distilled into
an RL agent, resulting in better sample efficiency.
Application example: In embodied robot, given humaninstruction and language-based description, LLM generates potential actions for the robot to choose from [83].
• Generator: Model-based RL hinges on precise world
models to learn accurate environment dynamics and simulate high-fidelity trajectories. Additionally, interpretability
remains another important issue in RL. Using the multimodal information understanding capability and prior
common-sense reasoning ability, LLMs can be 1) a
generator to generate accurate trajectories in model-based
RL; 2) generate policy explanations with the prompts of
related information in explainable RL. Application example: In Minecraft item crafting, LLMs generate Abstract
World Models—hypothesized sequences of subgoals for

6

a given task. These LLM-generated world models guide
RL agents’ exploration and learning and the RL agent
verifies and corrects the world model through gameplay,
combining LLM knowledge with grounded experience to
achieve an order of magnitude improvement in sample
efficiency over traditional methods [84].
IV. LLM AS I NFORMATION P ROCESSOR
The normal way for deep RL with language or visual
information is to jointly process the information and learn
a control policy, end-to-end. However, this demands the RL
agent to learn to comprehend the information and manage
the task simultaneously. Additionally, learning the language
or visual features by simply relying on the reward function is
challenging and may narrow the learned features to a narrow
utility, hampering the generalization ability of the agent [16].
With the advances in unsupervised techniques and largescale pre-trained models for CV and NLP, the decoupled
structure, where the encoders are separately trained, has gained
popularity [16], [85], [86]. Utilizing the powerful representation ability and prior knowledge, the pre-trained LLM or
vision-language model (VLM) model can serve as an information processor for RL. They can extract observation representations for downstream networks or translate natural language
into formal specifications, enabling the execution of multiple
tasks. This multi-task capability improves sample efficiency
and zero-shot performance, allowing agents to generalize
effectively across diverse and sparse-reward environments.
A. Feature Representation Extractor
Adopting the large pre-trained models in CV and NLP, the
learned feature representation can be a scaffold embedding
for downstream network learning and increase the sample
efficiency. As illustrated in Fig. 3 (i), the usages can be further
divided into two categories according to whether the model is
trained simultaneously. One way is to directly use the frozen
pre-trained model to extract embeddings from the observation
Ot and another way is to further fine-tune the pre-trained
model using contrastive learning with a contrastive loss Lct
to achieve better adaptation in new environments.
1) Frozen Pre-trained Model: Using the frozen large-scale
pre-trained model is the straightforward way. In reference [87],
the author proposed History Compression via Language Models (HELM) to utilize a frozen pre-trained Language Transformer to extract history representation and compression and
thus addresses the problem of partially observed MDP by
approximating the underlying MDP with the past representation. Specifically, the framework first uses FrozenHopfield, a
frozen associative memory to map observations [ot−2 , ot−1 , ot ]
to a compressed representation ht and then concatenate it
with a learned encoding of the current observation via a
convolutional neural network. Such a method solves the problem of how to effectively utilize the compressed history for
policy optimization. After that, Semantic HELM [88] proposed
a human-readable memory mechanism that summarizes past
visual observations in human language and uses multimodal
models to associate visual inputs with language tokens. The

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

(i) Feature Representation Extractor
Actor-Critic
Network

Invariant
Feature

Fine-tune

LLM / VLM
Encoder

according to the task

(ii) Language Translator
Instruction Information Translator
Open the door.

directly exposed to NL

[0 1 0]
task language translation
Environment Information Translator
You'll die if hitting a
wall.

Policies

Reward

Transition

State

MDP translator
Effect HittingWall:
if Near(wall) and a == walk:
R <= -1
S <= S_initial
t = 0 ...

Fig. 3. LLM as an information processor. (i) Feature Representation Extractor:
frozen/fine-tuned LLM extracts meaningful representations for downstream
RL networks. In the fine-tuning process, given observation (Ot ), invariant
feature abstraction (S̃t ) is learned with the contrastive loss (Lct ). Then,
the invariant is fed into the actor-critic network. After fine-tuning, given
different observations (Ot ) and (Ot′ ) with appearance variation, the extracted
representation is invariant, leading to robust RL performance. (ii) Language
Translator: LLM interprets diverse natural language inputs, converting them
into a standardized, task-specific format that the RL agent can efficiently
process and act upon.

memory is a semantic database S constructed by encoding
prompt-augmented tokens from the vocabularies of Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [89] and the pre-trained
language models. Given an observation ot , the agent retrieves
top-k embeddings from S as actor-critic input to assist the
policy optimization. Such a memory mechanism provides a
human-readable representation of the past and helps the agent
to cope with partially observable environments. In the experiment, they used the proximal policy optimization (PPO) [3]
algorithm and pretrained Transformer XL [90] model. When
testing on the partially observable environments, they found
the extracted semantics help the memory-less agent obtain
comparable scores with memory-based methods trained on
long trajectories. However, one limitation of such frozen pretrained models is that the representations cannot dynamically
adjust according to the task and environment.

7

2) Fine-tuning Pre-trained Model: When trained RL agents
are deployed in real-world applications, their performance
often deteriorates under significant appearance variations (outof-distribution data) due to overfitting to training scenarios. For
example, robots with vision-based navigation tasks may fail
when the environment color changes. Invariant feature representations serve as a form of state abstraction that remains consistent across out-of-distribution appearance variations such
as added noise, brightness changes, or slight rotations. When
encountering appearance changes or out-of-distribution data,
though the observation changed, the representation (feature
embedding) that fed into the policy/value network is nearly
unchanged, leading to robust RL performance and increased
generalization in unseen environments.
Contrastive learning is a common way to learn the invariant
feature representation. It learns representations from highdimensional data by contrasting positive examples against
negatives. Given a query q, the goal is to match query q
more closely to a positive key k+ than to any negative keys
K \ {k+ } in a set K. This process is modeled using similarity
measures, such as the dot product (q T k) or the bilinear
product (q T W k), where W is a weight matrix. To effectively
learn these representations, a contrastive loss function such as
InfoNCE [91] is used:
Lc = log

exp(q T W k+ )
PK−1
exp(q T W k+ ) + k
exp(q T W ki )

(1)

where exp is the exponential symbol and the whole Lc can
be viewed as the log-loss of a softmax classifier, treating the
matching of q to k+ as a multi-class classification problem
among K classes. By maximizing alignment between different
changes of the same observation via the above loss, the model
can learn the invariant representations.
When combining with RL, given different RL tasks, the required invariant feature representations should be adjusted accordingly. Therefore, researchers have explored different ways
to improve contrastive learning. In reference [92], to achieve
the zero-shot capability of embodied agents, the author devised
a visual prompt-based contrastive learning framework that uses
a pre-trained VLM to learn the visual state representations.
The visual prompts are learned on expert demonstrations from
domain factors such as camera settings and stride length. By
contrastively training the VLM on a pool of visual prompts
along with the RL policy learning process, the learned representations are robust to the variations of environments, leading
an increase of 18-20% success rates on unseen scenarios and
improved generalization capability. Based on the contrastive
learning, another method ReCoRe [93] added an interventioninvariant regularizer in the form of an auxiliary task such as
depth prediction and image denoising to explicitly enforce
invariance of learned representations to environment changes.
B. Language Translator
The unbounded and diverse representation of natural languages in both human instruction and environmental information impedes policy learning. LLM can be leveraged as
a language translator to reduce the additional burden of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

comprehending natural language for RL agents and increase
sample efficiency. As illustrated in Fig. 3 (ii), LLM transforms
the diverse and informal natural language information into
formal task-specific information, such as feature representation
or task-specific languages, thus assisting the learning process
of the RL agent.
1) Instruction Information Translation: One application
of LLM is to translate natural language-based instructions
for instruction-following applications. In reference [49], the
author investigated an inside-out scheme for natural languageconditioned RL by training an LLM that translates the natural
language to a task-related unique language. Such an insideout scheme prevents the policy from being directly exposed to
natural language instructions and helps efficient policy learning. Another literature STARLING [94] used LLM to translate
natural language-based instructions to game information and
example game metadata. The translated information is then
fed forward to Inform7, an interactive fiction game engine, to
develop a large amount of text-based games for RL agents to
master the desired skills.
2) Environment Information Translation: On the other
hand, LLM can also be used to translate the natural language
environment information into formal domain-specific language
that can specify MDP information, which converts natural
language sentences into grounded usable knowledge for the
agent. Previous works generally ground natural language into
individual task components such as task objectives description [95], rewards [96] and polices [97], [98]. To unify the
information about all the components of a task, [99] introduces
RLang, a grounded formal language capable of expressing
information about every element of an MDP and solutions such
as policies, plans, reward functions and transition functions.
By using LLM to translate natural language to RLang and train
RL agents upon RLang, the agents are capable of leveraging
information and avoid having to learn tabula rasa.
C. Summarization and Outlook
For information processing, LLM is used to accelerate RL
learning processing by decoupling the information processing
task and the controlling task, where LLM extracts feature
representations or handles the natural language-based information.
When multimodal data are involved in the environment,
e.g., robot manipulation tasks, the information processing task
becomes more challenging. For one thing, the misalignment
or contradiction between different modalities may exist [100].
Modality weighting techniques that adaptively learn the importance of different modalities by attention mechanisms provide
a potential solution for this problem [101]. In addition, CLIPbased multimodal foundation models using large-scale imagetext pairs have shown outstanding zero-shot ability in various
multimodal tasks [89]. By learning cross-modal and task
semantics, the misaligned modality can be replaced with a
virtually generated modality [102]. For another, how to effectively combine the information between different modalities
into a unified representation, i.e., multimodal fusion, is also an
important issue. In reference [103], a multimodal contrastive

8

learning with attention mechanisms, which learns the intra
and inter-modal representations, was proposed. The different
attention heads align the agreement from one modality to
another and vice versa, providing an informative representation
for the RL agent. However, most multimodal learning methods
do not consider the task information and only focus on the
modality alignment, remaining an area to be explored.
In the following, we list potential directions for future
research.
• Feature Representation Extractor: Although the use of
LLMs as feature representation extractors has shown
promise in enhancing RL, several challenges persist in
future research. Short-term goals include developing a
computationally efficient feature extractor and improving
the generalization of LLM-derived representations. In the
long term, researchers should focus on exploiting task
compositionality for better generalization and creating
adaptive extraction methods for diverse control tasks.
• Language Translator: Current existing works are still
limited. Short-term objectives involve exploring LLMs’
ability to handle more tasks and improving translation
efficiency and accuracy in RL contexts. Long-term goals
include developing multimodal translation capabilities
and integrating these with RL algorithms, achieving a
more general translator, and helping agent learning.
V. LLM AS R EWARD D ESIGNER
The reward signal is the most important information to
instruct agent learning in RL [1]. However, despite the fundamental importance, high-performing reward functions are
known to be notoriously difficult to design [104]. First,
specifying human notions of desired behavior is difficult via
designed reward functions or requires huge expert demonstrations. Moreover, dense rewards that accurately provide
learning signals require either manually decomposing the
general goal into sub-goals [105] or rewarding interesting
auxiliary objectives [106]. Nevertheless, both of these methods
suffer from the need for expert input and meticulous manual
crafting [23].
Benefiting from pre-trained common-sense knowledge, code
generation, and in-context learning ability, LLM has the potential to design or shape reward functions for DRL by leveraging
natural language-based instructions and environment information. In this section, we review recent literature in which LLMs
act as reward models that implicitly provide reward values or
explicitly write executable reward function codes detailing the
calculation process of reward scalars.
A. Implicit Reward Model
A large pre-trained model can be an implicit reward model
that directly provides auxiliary or overall reward value based
on the understanding of task objectives and observations. The
methods are illustrated in Fig. 4 (i). One way is by directly
prompting with language descriptions and another way is by
scoring the alignment between the feature representation of
the visual observations and language-based instructions.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

between agent and environment.

(i) Implicit Reward Model
Directly Prompting

Alignment Scoring

Prompting

Language
Similarity
Alignment Score
Designed
Reward
Visual

(ii) Explicit Reward Model
class GridEnv:
def calc_obs(self):
self.vol = ...

LLM Function
Generator

def calc_reward(obj, s,
a):
reward = ...

self.current = ...
self.num_bus = ...
self.load = ...

9

Self-refine Loop

...

Evaluation

Fig. 4. LLM as a reward designer. (i) Implicit Reward Model: LLMs
provide rewards through direct prompting or alignment scoring between
language instructions and visual observations. (ii) Explicit Reward Model:
LLMs generate executable code for reward functions, with potential for selfrefinement through evaluation loops.

1) Direct Prompting: Reference [107] simplified the manual reward design by prompting an LLM as a proxy reward
function with examples of desirable behaviors and the preferences description of the desired behaviors. Reference [108]
proposed a Read and Reward framework that utilizes LLMs
to read instruction manuals to boost the learning policies
of specific tasks. The framework includes a Question &
Answer (QA) extraction module for information retrieval
and summarization and a Reasoning module for evaluation.
Experimentally, they show RL algorithms, by their design, can
obtain significant improvement in performance and training
speed. In reference [45], Carta et al. proposed an automated
reward shaping method where the agent extracts auxiliary
objectives from the general language goal. Using a question
generation and QA system, the framework guides the agent
in reconstructing partial information about the global goal
and provides an intrinsic reward signal for the agent. This
intrinsic reward incentivizes the agent to produce trajectories
that help them reconstruct the partial information about the
general language goal. To acquire a generalizable policy by
continually learning a set of tasks is challenging for RL agents
since the agent is required to retain the previous knowledge
while quickly adapting to new tasks. Reference [109] introduced the Lafite-RL (Language agent feedback interactive
RL) framework that provides interactive rewards mimicking
human feedback based on LLMs’ real-time understanding of
the agent’s behavior. By designing two prompts, one to let
LLM understand the scenario and the other to instruct it about
the evaluation criterion, their framework can accelerate the RL
process while freeing up human effort during the interaction

Algorithm 1 Language Reward Modulated Pretraining
(LAMP) in [110]
1: Initialize parameters for Masked World Models (MWM)
2: Load pretrained DistilBERT [111] for language preprocessing
3: Load pretrained R3M visual encoder and score predictor
4: Initialize empty replay buffer
5: Populate language prompt buffer and synonym buffers
with predefined samples
6: for each training episode do
7:
Randomize scene textures from Ego4D and RLBench
datasets
8:
Sample ShapeNet objects and language prompts
9:
Insert ShapeNet objects into the scene
10:
Generate and process language embeddings using DistilBERT
11:
Execute policy to collect transitions
12:
Assign LAMP rewards using R3M score predictos
13:
Update buffers and train MWM with augmented rewards
14: end for
2) Alignment Scoring: For visual RL, some literature utilizes vision-language models as reward models to align multimodal data and calculate the similarity score using metrics
such as cosine similarity. Rocamonde et al. employs the
CLIP model as a zero-shot reward model to specify tasks via
natural language [64]. They first compute the probability pot ,l
that the agent achieves a goal given by language description
l out of a set of potential goals l′ ∈ L in the task set
L using the softmax computation with temperature τ over
the cosine similarity between visual state embeddings fθ (ot )
and language description embeddings gθ (l) across the set of
potential goals l′ :
exp(fθ (ot ) · gϕ (l)/τ )
pot ,l = P
.
′
l′ exp(fθ (ot ) · gϕ (l )/τ )

(2)

Then the reward is obtained by a binary reward function rt =
r(ot+1 , l) = I[pot+1 ,l ≥ β], which thresholding the probability.
Their framework only requires a single-sentence text prompt
description of the desired task with minimal prompt engineering. Another work [112] constructed reward signals based on
the similarity between natural language-based description and
embeddings from the pre-trained VLM encoder. By labeling
the expert demonstration with the reward signals, the framework effectively mitigates the problem of mis-generalization.
In reference [110], the authors proposed the Language Reward
Modulated Pretraining (LAMP) framework as a pertaining
utility for RL as opposed to a downstream task reward to
warm-start sample-efficient learning. The framework leverages
frozen, pre-trained VLMs such as R3M [113] to generate
noisy, albeit shaped exploration rewards by computing the
alignment score between instructions and image observations.
The algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. They used Masked
World Model [114], a visual model-based RL algorithm for
robot manipulation based on image and instructions. The

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

images were downloaded from Ego4D [115] and the language
instructions were obtained by querying ChatGPT. The reward
is then calculated from the R3M alignment score. After that,
the generated rewards are optimized with standard noveltyseeking exploration rewards for language-conditioned policy.
Reference [116] explored preference-based RL, where the
agent learns a reward function from preference labels over
the behaviors. A VLM is leveraged to generate preference
labels given visual observations and a text description of the
task goal. The evaluation is based on a series of vision-based
manipulation tasks. Results suggested that prompting VLMs
to produce preference labels for reward learning leads to better
performance, in contrast to treating them as reward functions
to produce raw reward scores.
B. Explicit Reward Model
Another way to design reward functions is by generating
executable codes that explicitly specify the details of the calculation process, as illustrated in Fig. 4 (ii). Compared to the
implicit reward value provision, this explicit way transparently
reflects the reasoning and logical process of LLMs and thus
is readable for humans to further evaluate and optimize.
To help robots learn low-level actions, reference [117]
harnessed the code generation ability of LLMs to define the
lower-level reward parameters based on high-level instructions.
Using such a reward design paradigm, their work bridges
the gap between high-level language instructions to low-level
robot actions and can reliably tackle 90% of the designed
tasks compared to the 50% of the baseline. Motivated by the
capability of LLM for self-refinement [118], reference [119]
proposed a framework with a self-refinement mechanism for
automated reward function design, including initial design,
evaluation and self-refinement loop. Their results indicate that
the LLM-designed reward functions are able to rival or surpass
manually designed reward functions. Similarly, Eureka [82]
developed a reward optimization algorithm with self-reflection.
The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 2. In each iteration,
it uses an environment source code and task description to
sample different reward function candidates from a coding
LLM. Then the candidates are used to instruct RL training.
After training, the results are used to calculate the scores of the
reward candidates. Then the best reward function code are selected for reflection, where LLM uses the reasoning capability
to progressively improve the reward code. In the experiment,
results show that their proposed method can achieve humanlevel performance on reward design and solve dexterous
manipulation tasks that were previously infeasible by manual
reward engineering. Another work Text2Reward [120] generated shaped dense reward functions as executable programs
based on the environment description. Given the sensitivity of
RL training and the ambiguity of language, the RL policy may
fail to achieve the goal. Text2Reward addresses the problem
by executing the learned policy in the environment, requesting
human feedback and refining the reward accordingly.
C. Summarization and Outlook
The use of LLMs as reward designers in RL offers a more
natural and efficient way to design complex reward functions.

10

Algorithm 2 Eureka [82]
Require: Task description l, environment code C, coding
LLM Mc , evaluation function E, initial prompt prompt,
optimization iterations N , iteration batch size K
1: for i ← 1 to N do
2:
// Sample K reward code candidates
from coding LLM Mc
3:
R1 , . . . , RK ← sample(l, Mc , C, prompt)
4:
// Evaluate reward candidates
i
5:
si1 = E(R1i ), si2 = E(R2i ), . . . , siK = E(RK
)
6:
// Select the best reward code
7:
best = arg maxk (si1 , . . . , siK )
8:
// Reward reflection
i
9:
prompt← prompt:Reflection(Rbest
, sibest )
10:
// Optimize Eureka reward code
11:
if sibest > sEureka then
i
12:
REureka , sEureka ← (Rbest
, sibest )
13:
end if
14: end for
15: return REureka

By leveraging natural language processing capabilities, LLMs
simplify the traditionally challenging task of reward function
design, enhancing both the efficiency and effectiveness of RL
algorithms.
However, the inherent biases in LLMs may transfer to the
designed reward functions, potentially resulting in suboptimal
or harmful behaviors [121]. This presents a potential risk requiring careful consideration. While existing mitigation efforts
primarily address biases in demographic, cultural, and political
beliefs [122], task-specific biases remain understudied, thus
limiting the applicability of LLM-designed reward functions.
Toward this end, we list some potential solutions. First, in
preference-based RL, when an RL agent optimizes against
biased reward models generated by LLMs to predict human
preferences, overoptimization and overfitting may occur [123],
impeding the learning of the true reward function. Reward
function regularization [124] includes the agent preference
generated by the value function as a regularization term to
mitigate the risk, which helps recover the true underlying
reward function. Secondly, human-in-the-loop approaches are
another direction to prevent harmful behaviors from designed
reward functions. One viable solution is to design an evaluation module where humans can intervene and correct undesired behaviors and reward functions when the agent’s action
violates a predefined set of rules. Finally, principles from
ensemble learning suggest that combining the reward functions
from different LLM models mitigates bias from individual
LLMs, leading to improved unbiased performance compared
to a single LLM [125].
In the future, we expect advancements in the following
areas:
• Implicit Reward Model: An immediate focus may consider improving how well LLM-generated rewards align
with human intentions. This involves refining the quality of language instructions to reduce ambiguities and
inaccuracies, ensuring that the reward functions align

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

precisely with human notions of desired behavior. In the
longer term, generalization and transferability of LLMgenerated rewards across different tasks and environments, especially in complex, high-dimensional visual
environments, is also an important direction to explore.
• Explicit Reward Model: A key limitation in reward code
generation is its dependency on pre-trained commonsense knowledge, which can be restrictive for highly
specialized tasks not covered in training data. Therefore,
short-term goals may include enhancing prompts with detailed, task-specific information and external knowledge.
Additionally, the reliance on manually designed templates
for motion descriptions limits the adaptability. Looking
further ahead, researchers might develop automated or
unified processes for designing templates, moving beyond
the current limitations of manual motion description
templates.
VI. LLM AS D ECISION -M AKER
LLMs trained on a massive amount of data show impressive results in language understanding tasks [29], instructionfollowing [126], vision-language navigation [127] and tasks
requiring planning and sequential reasoning [83]. Such success
motivates researchers to explore the potential of LLMs for
decision-making problems. In this section, we divide the role
of LLM as 1) the action-maker that generates actions; and 2)
the action-guider that instructs the actions.
(i) Action-making
Next Action
Task-Specific Model
Pretrained LLM

Pretrained LLM as General Scoffold

Trajectory

Goal / Instruction

(ii) Action-guiding
Action Candidates

Expert Actions

Env & Trajectory
History

Env

Update Policy
Agent

Action
Candidates
Critic Network

Replay

Inst.

Fig. 5. LLM as a decision-maker. (i) Action-Making: given a T -length
trajectory τ = (R̂1 , s1 , a1 , . . . , R̂T , sT , aT ) as a sequence of ordered
return-to-go R̂, action a, and states s, LLM learns to P
predict future action
′ 2
a′t by minimizing the mean squared error loss L =
t ∥at − at ∥2 . (ii)
Action-Guiding: LLM generates a reduced set of action candidates for agents
or generates expert actions to regularize RL learning.

A. Action-Making
Transformer-based models such as Decision Transformer
(DT) [128] have shown great potential in offline RL domain.

11

Instead of using the traditional trial-and-error way, these models treat offline RL as a sequence modeling problem, yielding
promising results. As LLM itself is a large-scale Transformerbased model, a natural thought is to leverage the pre-trained
power of LLM within this paradigm.
We term this function of LLM as action-making, and
identify two typical approaches, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (i).
In the first approach (left figure), pre-trained LLM is finetuned and then employed for action generation. In the second
approach (right figure), goal/instruction along with trajectory
are fed to pre-trained LLM. Moreover, a task-specific smaller
model is appended after the fine-tuned LLM to facilitate rapid
adaptation to diverse tasks.
Pre-trained LLMs outperform basic DT in generalization
and sample efficiency, especially for sparse-reward and longhorizon tasks. LLMs’ latent representations, learned from diverse linguistic data, provide valuable prior knowledge for new
tasks. This knowledge enables LLMs to solve unseen tasks
with less training data, by transferring knowledge from similar
tasks and predicting high-reward actions even with sparse
feedback. For instance, comparing pre-trained LLM with basic
DT, Li et al. [129] reported a 43.6% improvement in out-ofdistribution (novel) task completion rates while requiring less
training data (e.g., 500 vs 10K). Additionally, Shi et al. [130]
demonstrated a 50% performance gain in sparse-reward environments like Kitchen and Reacher2d. For long-horizon tasks,
pre-trained representations encode future information, guiding
decision-making over extended sequences. For instance, in
AntMaze, a long-horizon navigation environment, pre-trained
representations yield five times higher scores compared to nonpre-trained counterparts [131].
Several studies have further explored the application of
LLMs in offline RL, demonstrating their versatility and effectiveness across various tasks and benchmarks. Reference [132]
investigated the transferability of general language models on
specific RL tasks. Fined-tuned on offline RL tasks (control,
games), these general language models outperform Decision
Transformer and reduce training time by 3-6x on D4RL
benchmark [133]. Reference [129] used pre-trained LLM as a
general scaffold for task-specific model learning, where goals
were added along with observations as the input for LLM.
Results on embodied decision-making tasks demonstrate that
their proposed method outperforms others with less training
data, especially when generalizing to novel tasks. In addition,
they found representations in pre-trained language models
can aid learning and generalization even outside of language.
To unify language reasoning with actions in a single policy,
reference [134] generated textual captions interleaved with
actions when training the Transformer-based policy. Results
show that by using captions describing the next subgoals,
the reasoning policy can consistently outperform the captionfree baseline. For scenarios where data collection is costly
and risky, reference [130] proposed a general framework to
effectively use pre-trained LLM for offline RL. The pretrained LLM are based on DT. To combine the pre-trained
knowledge and task-related domain knowledge, they finetuned pre-trained LLM with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
method. The architecture of Transformer is based on GPT-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

2 model with 12 layers and 12 attention heads. To fine-tune
the LLM, they obtained the trajectory data from the D4RL
dataset. Results show their method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in sparse-reward tasks with limited data samples.
To integrate multimodal data, e.g., vision and language, into
the offline RL, reference [135] co-fine-tuned vision-language
models on both robotic trajectory data and Internet-scale
vision-language tasks, e.g., visual question answering. In the
framework, they incorporate the actions as natural language
tokens and co-fine-tune models on both vision and language
datasets. Results show that such co-fine-tune methods can
increase generalization performance and the chain of thought
reasoning can help the agent perform multi-stage semantic
reasoning and solve complex tasks.
B. Action-Guiding
The action-guider role is illustrated in Fig. 5 (ii). As
an action-guider, LLM guides the action selection by either
generating reasonable action candidates or expert actions.
By instructing the action selection, LLM improves sample
efficiency and exploration efficiency posed by enormous action
spaces and natural language.
1) Action Candidates: In environments such as text-based
games, action spaces are large and only a tiny fraction of
actions are accessible. Although RL agents can learn through
extensive trials, they often face exploration efficiency issues,
especially in multi-task settings where agents must manage
various tasks simultaneously. LLMs address this challenge
by generating a reduced set of action candidates based on
task understanding. These candidates are likely to yield high
rewards and are applicable across multiple tasks, enhancing
exploration efficiency and reducing the need for ineffective
exploration. Reference [136] trained a GPT-2 model to generate the candidates. To maximize long-term rewards, another
neural network is used to calculate the Q-values of these
candidates. When tested in 28 man-made text games from
Jericho framework [137], they found the method excludes
non-useful actions, speeds up the exploration and consistently
achieves higher scores by more than 20%. Following this work,
another study [83] proposed the SayCan framework, where
instruction-following robots are integrated with an embodied
LLM to understand tasks. When receiving instructions, the
embodied LLM generates a high-level step-by-step plan. When
acting, LLM produces action candidates based on task prompts
and then the candidate with the largest critic value is executed.
Being evaluated in an office kitchen with real-world robotic
tasks from 101 instructions, their method can complete longhorizon, abstract, natural language instructions on a mobile
manipulator.
2) Expert Actions: Traditional RL agents cannot converge
to desirable equilibrium in human-AI collaboration or learn
efficiently for complex tasks, due to the lack of expert
demonstrations. With the understanding of human behavior
and general knowledge, LLM solves the issues by producing
high-quality expert actions to regularize RL agents. In humanAI collaboration, instructRL [138] used LLM to generate prior
policy based on human instructions and uses this prior to

12

regularizing the RL objective. Specifically, instructRL augments the policy update function with an auxiliary term
pLLM [lang(at )|lang(τti ), inst], the probability of choosing an
action based on the trajectory and instructions. Experiments
show instructRL converges to policies aligned with human
preferences. Similarly, to address the sample inefficiency issue
of RL, Zhou et al. [139] included the policy difference between
the student model and LLM-based teacher into RL learning
loss. Their experiments on simulation platforms demonstrate
that the method reduced training iterations by a factor of 1
to 9. In reference [140], LLM was leveraged to generate a
high-level expert motion plan of robotics tasks, guiding RL
policies to efficiently solve robotics control tasks. The highlevel language plan breaks long-horizon tasks into stages to
execute. Then, a single RL policy was trained across all states
and stepped through the language plan. Their results show the
proposed method solves long-horizon tasks from raw visual
input spanning different benchmarks at success rates of over
85%, out-performing classical, language-based, and end-toend approaches.
C. Summarization and Outlook
Sample inefficiency and exploration inefficiency remain
long-standing challenges for deep RL, particularly in environments with sparse rewards or where data collection is
expensive or risky. LLM provides three ways to solve the
problems. First, LLM as action-makers treat RL as a conditional sequence modeling problem. The supervised way finetunes pre-trained LLMs to predict future actions. Benefiting
from learned prior knowledge, LLM can perform well even
in out-of-distribution, sparse-reward, and long-horizon tasks.
Second, LLM as action-guiders generates potential action
candidates for RL. With task comprehension, these action
candidates promote agents to explore potentially high taskvalue states, thus increasing exploration efficiency. Last, LLM
generates expert actions to help RL learn from demonstrations.
By incorporating demonstrations from LLM, and RL learns
specific prior knowledge and improves sample efficiency.
Safety issues are another important topic when using LLMs
as decision-makers in RL, particularly for costly and risky
tasks [141]. For action-making, DT-based offline RL learns
the optimal policy from pre-collected datasets. Recently, integrating safety constraints has been explored by some works
using methods such as pessimistic estimations [142] and
stationary distribution correction [143]. These methods set a
constant constraint threshold before training. To dynamically
adjust the threshold during deployment, a constrained decision transformer that dynamically relabels the reward based
on safety-reward trade-offs was proposed [144]. For actionguiding, LLMs are viewed as instructors to provide expert
actions. Ensuring the safety of actions generated by LLMs
differs from that in action-making. Leveraging ideas from
LLM-based agent research, we propose several potential solutions. First, LLMs can be equipped with testing modules that
execute code to evaluate action safety and feasibility [145].
Second, implementing a carefully designed human-in-theloop framework enables safety intervention through human

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

oversight [146]. Finally, developing memory modules with
reasoning mechanisms that adaptively learn safety boundaries
from past experiences provides a continual learning-based
approach to ensuring long-term safety [147].
In the following, we list the challenges and future directions
of the two roles as below:
• Action-making: Directly employing pre-trained largescale LLM to generate actions demands huge computational resources and huge data for fine-tuning it in specific
tasks. In the short term, future work may consider more
cost-effective methods such as the Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [148] to exploit the power of LLM in direct
decision-making. Long-term goals involve developing
innovative techniques to efficiently exploit the power
of LLMs in direct decision-making, potentially creating
hybrid models that combine the strengths of LLMs with
more lightweight, task-specific architectures.
• Action-guiding: Since the LLM acts as an instructor
to provide expert actions, the bias and limitations are
also inherited by the agent. In addition, LLM itself
cannot inherently interrogate or intervene in the environment, which limits LLMs’ capabilities to intentionally
aggregate information. Short-term goal is to address
the inherited biases and limitations when LLMs act as
instructors providing expert actions, focusing on methods to filter or correct biased information. In the long
term, it is crucial to develop mechanisms for LLMs to
actively interrogate and intervene in the environment,
enabling them to intentionally aggregate information and
improve their capabilities through real-world interactions.
Therefore, how to use the information gained from realworld interactions to improve the LLM itself in terms of
actuality and reasoning is another important problem.
VII. LLM AS G ENERATOR
The generative capability of LLMs can be applied to environmental simulation and behavior explanation. On the one
hand, growing interests in applying RL to the real world and
risky data-collection process suggests a need for imaginary
rollouts [149], [150]. Possessed with a powerful modeling
capability and world knowledge, LLMs can serve as a world
model simulator to learn complex environmental dynamics
with high fidelity by iteratively predicting the next state and
reward, thus increasing the sample efficiency in model-based
RL [151], [152]. On the other hand, in RL, interpretability
remains an important security issue in current black-box AI
systems as they are increasingly being deployed to help endusers with everyday tasks. Explanations of policy can improve
the end-user understanding of the agent’s decision-making and
inform the reward function design for agent learning. In such
aspects, LLM can act as a policy interpreter based on their
knowledge and reasoning ability. In this section, we classify
the above two roles of LLM as a generator and review recent
related works.
A. World Model Simulator
Serving as a world model simulator, LLM is trained as a
1) trajectory rolloutor, which auto-regressively generates ac-

13

(i) World Model Simulator
Enhance
Real
World

Sim.
World

Collect
Real Data

Acquire
Guide

Knowledge

Render

Trajectory
Rollout

Dynamics
Reconstruction

Policy
Learning

Model
World Model
Simulator

(ii) Policy Interpreter
Prompts

State
Action
History

Further Prompts

Guide

Policy
Interpreter

Interpretation

Fig. 6. LLM as a generator. (i) World Model Simulator: LLM uses realworld data and knowledge to model dynamics, generate simulated worlds, and
assist policy learning. (ii) Policy Interpreter: LLM generates interpretations of
agent behavior based on state-action history and prompts, potentially leading
to explainable RL.

curate trajectories for the agent to learn and plan; 2) dynamics
representation learner, which predicts the latent representation
of the world using representation learning. A flow chart of
the world model is illustrated in Fig. 6 (i). From the real
world, knowledge and real data can be collected to construct
a world model simulator, which further models the dynamics
representation of the world, generates trajectories and helps
the policy learning of the agent in the real world.
1) Trajectory Rolloutor: Similar to the decision transformer [153] in offline RL, pre-trained large-scale models
were used in model-based to synthesize trajectories. In 2022,
Micheli et al. proposed IRIS, an agent that employs a discrete
autoencoder and an autoregressive Transformer to learn the
world model for Atari games [154]. With the equivalent of
two hours of gameplay in the Atari 100k benchmark, the
proposed method outperforms humans in 10 out of 26 games.
Similarly, reference [155] applied a transformer to build a
sample-efficient world model for Atari games. Utilizing such
a Transformer-based world model (TWM), the RL agent can
solve the long-term dependency and train a state-of-the-art policy on the Atari 100k benchmark based on generated meaningful experiences from TWM. Visual RL enables the RL agent
to learn from visual observations effectively. Reference [156]
proposed TransDreamer, a Transformer-based model-based RL
agent that leverages a Transformer for dynamics predictions
in 2D and 3D visual RL tasks. Experiments showed the
TransDreamer agent can outperform Dreamer with long-range
memory access and memory-based reasoning. Based on the
development of supervised pre-training methods, Seo et al.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

proposed a framework that learns world model dynamics from
action-free video representations [157]. The framework added
a video-based intrinsic bonus for better-guiding exploration to
effectively encourage agents to learn diverse behaviors. The
experimental results demonstrated their proposed method can
improve the performances of vision-based RL on manipulation
and locomotion tasks by transferring the pre-trained representations from unseen domains.
2) Dynamics Representation Learner: Using representation
learning techniques, the latent representation of the future
can be learned to assist decision-making. Reference [114]
introduced a visual model-based RL framework that decouples visual representation learning and dynamic learning by
training an autoencoder with a vision Transformer to reconstruct pixel-given masked observations and learn the dynamics
from the latent space. By such a decoupling approach, their
proposed method achieved state-of-the-art performance on
visual robotic tasks from Meta-world and RLBench. Utilizing
the fact that language contains rich information signals and
can help agents to predict the future, Lin et al. proposed
Dynalang [46], where an agent that learns a multimodal world
model to predict future text and image representations and
thereby instruct the decision-making process. The algorithm
is presented in Algorithm 3. In the training part, a LLMbased world model implemented with Recurrent State Space
Model (RSSM) [158] computes the state representation zt
based on the collected transitions. After that, the representation
zt and the action at are fed into the RSSM to predict the
future representations zt+1 . In addition, the language ˆlt and
images x̂t are predicted to reconstruct the original state. Then,
the world model is trained to learn the next representation
and reconstruct observations from the representations. After
updating, the world model imagined (sampled) rollouts and the
policy is trained to maximize the imagined rewards. Compared
to other works that use language only for predicting actions,
multimodal information enables Dynalang to handle tasks
that require grounded language generation, obtaining higher
score than methods provided with only task descriptions.
To solve the out-of-distribution generalization problem in
visual control tasks of RL, reference [159] proposed the
Language Grounded World Model (LanGWM), which focuses
on learning language-grounded visual features to enhance the
world model learning. To improve the generalization of the
learned visual features, they masked the bounding boxes and
predicted them with given language descriptions. Utilizing the
expressing ability of language in higher-level concepts and
global contexts, the proposed LanGWM method yields stateof-the-art results on out-of-distribution tests.
B. Policy Interpreter
Explainable RL (XRL) is an emerging subfield of both
explainable machine learning and RL that has attracted considerable attention recently. XRL aims to elucidate the decisionmaking process of learning agents. According to a survey
in explainable RL [160], the categories of XRL include the
feature importance, learning process and MDP, and policy
level. Currently, the usage of LLMs in XRL has only been

14

Algorithm 3 Training part of Dynalang [46]
Require: Rewards rt , episode continue flag ct , images xt ,
language tokens lt , actions at , model state (ht , zt ).
1: while training do
2:
Draw batch of transitions {(rt , ct , xt , lt , at )} from replay buffer.
3:
Use world model to compute multimodal representations zt , future predictions ẑt+1 , and decode x̂t , ˆlt , r̂t ,
ĉt .
4:
Update world model to minimize Lpred + Lrepr .
5:
Imagine rollouts from all zt using π.
6:
Update actor to minimize Lπ .
7:
Update critic to minimize LV .
8: end while

limited to the policy level, i.e., as the policy interpreter.
Therefore, though there is limited literature related to this area,
we think this field is important and requires more attention in
the future. The following will introduce the role of LLMs as
policy interpreters and an outlook regarding other categories
of XRL will be provided in the last subsection.
As the policy interpreter, LLM generates explanations with
the prompts of state and action description or trajectory
information. An illustration is depicted in Fig. 6. Using the
trajectory history of states and actions as context information,
LLMs can be prompts to generate readable interpretations of
current policies or situations for humans.
Das et al. [161] proposed a unified framework called
State2Explanation (S2E), that learns a joint embedding model
between state-action pairs and concept-based explanation.
Based on the learned models, the explanation can help inform
reward shaping during an agent’s training and provide insights
to end-users at deployment. Another work [162] first distilled
the policy into a decision tree, derives the decision path,
and then prompts an LLM to generate a natural language
explanation based on the decision path. Additionally, Lu et
al. [163] introduced a framework that decomposes the overall
reward into multiple sub-rewards based on specific object
properties, defines actions as high-level motion primitives executed at precise 3D positions to simplify decision-making, and
integrates LLMs to enable interactive and flexible querying of
explanations.
C. Summarization and Outlook
As a generator, LLMs can be integrated into model-based
RL or explainable RL, i.e., serving as world model simulators
or policy interpreters, respectively. As world model simulators,
LLMs enhance model-based RL by auto-regressively generating accurate trajectories (trajectory rollout) and by predicting
latent world representations (world representation learners),
significantly improving sample efficiency and decision-making
accuracy. In the realm of explainable RL, LLMs provide
valuable insights for both end-user understanding and reward
shaping by generating explanations based on trajectory information. However, the current usages of LLMs in explainable
RL are rather limited and have great potential for future work.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

Below are discussions on the key limitations and future work
directions of the two roles:
• World Model Simulator: LLMs encounter challenges in
aligning their abstract knowledge with the specific requirements of different environments, leading to limitations in functional competence and grounding. This
misalignment affects their effectiveness in generating
trajectories and interacting with the environment. Additionally, the current model-based agents, which rely on
purely observational world models, present difficulties for
human adaptation. These models are typically modifiable
only through observational data, which is not an effective
means for humans to communicate complex intentions or
adjustments. Furthermore, while LLMs hold promise for
enhancing multi-task learning by generating trajectories
and dynamic representations applicable to multiple tasks,
there remains a scarcity of research exploring this potential.Looking ahead, in the short term, researchers might
prioritize improving LLMs’ alignment with specific environment requirements. For the long term, a promising
direction would be to integrate language instructions or
an adapter into the world model. This approach could
lead to a more flexible and adaptive world model that can
better accommodate human intentions and adjustments, as
well as support more effective multi-task learning through
enhanced trajectory generation and dynamic representations.
• Policy Interpreter: As policy interpreters, the quality of
explanations depends on the LLM’s understanding of
feature representations and implicit logic of policy. How
to utilize domain knowledge or examples to improve the
understanding of a complex policy is still a major issue.
In the short term, researchers could focus on enhancing
LLMs’ ability to interpret the correlation between observations and policy selection, providing insights into the
decision-making process of RL agents. This could involve
developing techniques to better leverage domain knowledge and examples for improving LLMs’ understanding
of complex policies. In the long-term, the field could
explore advanced applications of LLMs in explainable
RL, such as analyzing the learning process and MDP to
reveal influences on agent behavior. Researchers could
develop sophisticated prompting techniques for LLMs to
answer nuanced “why” and “why-not” questions with
MDP context, providing deeper explanations of agent
decision-making.

15

the LLM-enhanced RL paradigm. Finally, we discuss future
opportunities and challenges, taking into account both the
untapped capabilities and inherent limitations of LLMs, with a
particular focus on their application in multimodal information
environments.
A. Comparison of Different LLM-Enhanced RL Approaches
This section provides a comparative analysis of the four
LLM-enhanced RL approaches, helping researchers understand the strengths and limitations of each approach.
• Information Processor: As an information processor,
LLM excels in handling complex, multimodal inputs,
particularly in translating natural language instructions
or environment information into a format more readily
usable by RL agents. This role significantly enhances the
agent’s ability to understand and interact with complex
environments. However, it faces challenges in computational efficiency and may struggle with highly specialized
domain knowledge not covered in its pre-training.
• Reward Designer: LLMs serving as reward designers
offer a more intuitive and flexible approach to defining
reward functions, especially in complex or sparse-reward
environments. This role can significantly improve the
alignment of RL objectives with human intentions. The
main limitation lies in ensuring that generated rewards
accurately reflect task-specific nuances and long-term
goals, particularly in highly specialized domains.
• Decision-Maker: As decision-makers, LLMs can either
directly generate actions or guide action selection, leveraging their vast knowledge base to improve sample efficiency and exploration in RL. This role is particularly
effective in tasks requiring complex reasoning or longterm planning. However, it may face challenges in realtime decision-making scenarios due to computational
overhead and may inherit biases present in the LLM’s
training data.
• Generator: In the generator role, LLMs can simulate
complex environments for model-based RL and provide
interpretable explanations of RL policies. This capability
is invaluable for improving sample efficiency and making
RL more transparent and understandable. The main challenges include aligning generated simulations with realworld dynamics and ensuring the relevance and accuracy
of policy explanations.
B. Applications of LLM-Enhanced RL

VIII. D ISCUSSION
In previous sections, we introduced the concept “LLMenhanced RL” and developed a corresponding framework,
which we extended to the integration of multimodal AI
models such as visual-language models. We then discussed
the different LLM-enhanced RL approaches. This section
provides a comprehensive analysis of the LLM-enhanced RL
approach. We begin with a comparative analysis of the different LLM roles, highlighting their advantages and limitations.
Following this, we explore potential real-world applications of

Based on the characteristics of LLM-enhanced RL, such as
multimodal information understanding and multi-task learning
and generation, we believe that LLM-enhanced RL opens up
a wide array of potential applications. Here we list several
applications to inspire researchers.
• Robotics: RL is widely used in robots to learn how to
make decisions and execute actions to achieve goals. Utilizing natural language understanding and general logical
reasoning abilities, LLM-enhanced RL can 1) improve
the efficiency of human-robot interaction, 2) help robots

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

understand human needs and behavioral logic, and 3)
enhance decision-making and planning capabilities.
• Autonomous Driving: Autonomous driving uses RL to
make decisions in complex, ever-changing environments
that involve understanding both sensor data (visual, lidar,
radar) and contextual information (traffic laws, human
behavior). LLM-enhanced RL could employ LLMs to 1)
process this multimodal information and natural language
instructions; or 2) design comprehensive rewards based
on multi-disciplinary metrics such as safety, efficiency,
and passenger comfort.
• Energy Management: In the energy system, operators or
users apply RL to efficiently manage the usage, transportation, conversion and storage of multiple energy with
high uncertainty brought by renewable resources. LLMenhanced RL in such cases can 1) improve the RL agents’
ability to handle multi-objective tasks, such as economy,
safety, and low carbon, by reward function designing,
and 2) increase the sample efficiency for the new energy
system.
• Healthcare Recommendation: RL is used to learn recommendations or suggestions in healthcare [164]. LLMs
can utilize the domain knowledge to analyze the vast
amount of patient data and medical histories, therefore, 1)
accelerating the learning process of RL recommendation
and 2) providing more accurate diagnostic and treatment
recommendations in healthcare.
C. Opportunities for LLM-Enhanced RL
Although current works in LLM-enhanced RL have already
shown better performance in several aspects, more unexplored
areas remain to be explored and may lead to significant improvement. Below, we summarize the potential opportunities
of LLM-enhanced RL from both the perspectives of RL and
LLM capabilities, respectively.
• RL: Existing work such as [138], [134], [129] mainly focus on the general RL while various specialized branches
of RL are still under-exploited, e.g. multi-agent RL,
safe RL, transfer RL, explainable RL, multi-task RL,
in-context RL and human-centric RL. In the multiagent area, compared to various works about multiLLM-agent collaboration [165], [166], LLM-based multiagent RL remains largely unexplored [167]. A recent
survey discussed some open research problems within this
field [168]. LLM-enhanced strategies could be employed
to facilitate communication and collaboration among RL
agents. The natural language understanding capabilities
of LLMs can be used to interpret and generate instructions or strategies among agents, enhancing cooperative
behaviors or competition strategies; Safe RL could benefit
from the reasoning and predictive capabilities of LLMs
to design cost functions that encourage safety criteria
compliance, reducing the risks of dangerous exploration;
In transfer RL, LLMs can assist in identifying similarities between tasks or environments, leveraging their
vast knowledge base to facilitate knowledge transfer and
thus improve learning efficiency and adaptability across

16

different tasks; For multi-task RL, LLMs enhance agents
by processing diverse entity representations and aligning
instructions (Information Processor), generating reduced
action sets and expert actions for various tasks (DecisionMaker), and creating task-specific trajectories and dynamic representations (Generator). Recently, in-context
RL has emerged as a promising field by leveraging the
in-context learning capability of LLMs to solve decisionmaking problems [169]. Given a query state and an incontext offline dataset, a trained LLM exhibits both online exploration and offline conservation while avoiding
extensive trial and error and is sample-efficient. Additionally, human-centric RL is another prominent field in
healthcare and robotics, where AI and humans learn and
communicate with each other for collaboration [170]. In
this setting, an LLM naturally serves as a perfect mediator
to facilitate bidirectional communication through natural
language interactions.
• LLM: While LLMs have been integrated with RL in
various methods, several promising directions remain to
be explored to further enhance LLM capabilities for RL.
It can be divided into the language model view and the
language agent view as follows:
– From the model perspective: LLM could be enhanced by an external knowledge base and continual learning. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
techniques help LLM to retrieve the most relevant
data in an external database, which could be used
to attach knowledge in the task domains [171].
Continual learning techniques are also a hot field
that enables models to continuously acquire new
knowledge while retaining previously learned capabilities [172]. This technique allows both LLMs
and RL agents to continuously evolve and adapt to
new tasks or environments while maintaining their
fundamental pre-trained abilities, leading to more
flexible and robust learning systems.
– From the agent perspective: Equipping LLMbased agents with specialized modules—namely,
planning modules, memory modules, and action
modules—can significantly enhance the capabilities
of LLMs [173], [174]. In the planning module, multistep reasoning techniques such as CoT-based reasoning [74] and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [175]
can be used to enhance LLM’s long-term planning
ability, improving the long-term task decomposition
ability of RL agents; for the memory module, longand short-term human-memories and corresponding
memory retrieval mechanisms provide a way to
store previous experiences and learn adaptively along
with the RL agents [176]; for the action module,
tool integration presents another promising direction to unlock new possibilities for LLMs. External tools such as mathematical solvers [177] and
internet browsers [178] can augment LLMs’ capabilities in RL tasks requiring complex mathematical
computations and real-time information processing,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

respectively. Furthermore, collaboration of multiple
LLM agents [179] is another promising direction.
With each LLM playing different roles and acquiring different information, multiple distinctive LLM
agents solve complex problems by communicating
and exchanging information. In the context of LLMenhanced RL, different LLMs could potential serves
different roles and work together to guiding RL. For
example, in a group of three LLM agents, one LLM
focuses on guiding short-term or immediate problemsolving for RL; another LLM is responsible for longterm planning for RL; the last LLM serves as a
coordinator responsible for overseeing the group and
adjusting horizon consideration accordingly.
D. Challenges of LLM-Enhanced RL
While LLM improves different issues in the RL paradigm,
the success of LLM-enhanced RL is inherently tied to the capabilities and limitations of the underlying LLM. The primary
concerns revolve around the inherent limitations of LLMs,
adaptability of LLMs in RL environments, computational
demands, and the broader implications of deploying such
systems in real-world scenarios.
• Inherent Limitations of LLMs: The effectiveness of LLMenhanced RL systems is fundamentally constrained by
the inherent capabilities and limitations of the underlying
language models. The presence of systematic biases and
potential hallucinations in pre-trained LLMs can significantly impact the reliability of multimodal input interpretation, potentially compromising the overall performance
of the RL agent. This necessitates the development of
robust evaluation frameworks to systematically characterize and delineate the capability boundaries of LLMs
given specified RL contexts. Furthermore, incorporating
uncertainty quantification methods aids in identifying unreliable answers, increasing the trustworthiness of LLMs’
responses [180].
• Adaptability of LLMs in RL Environments: Despite the
vast knowledge base of LLMs, they may struggle to
adapt to specific or novel RL task environments that are
not well-represented in their training data. This calls for
methods to expand the task-related knowledge for LLM
and ground LLMs’ inherent knowledge in specific domains. In terms of expanding the task-related knowledge,
RAG-related techniques attach LLMs with the external
domain-knowledge without further training [171]. When
fine-tuning LLMs, employing data augmentation techniques such as generating synthetic data is another way
to expand the diversity of training scenarios and improve
generalization to novel environments [181]. Additionally,
continual learning mechanisms help preserve previously
acquired knowledge while adapting to new information [182]. For domain-specific knowledge grounding,
approaches include training value functions to evaluate
the long-term utility of LLM instructions [83]. Expert
trajectories provide another valuable source of information, allowing LLMs to learn optimal decision-making
patterns through in-context learning.

17

Computational Demands: The integration of LLMs into
the RL learning process introduces complexities in terms
of computational overhead and inference times, which
slow down the learning process of RL. To address this
challenge, several potential solutions have been proposed
across different levels. At the data level, input compression techniques such as prompt pruning [183] can be employed to directly shorten the model input, significantly
reducing inference time without substantial loss in performance. At the model level, efficient architecture designs
like mixture-of-experts (MoE) [184] enable conditional
computation, activating only relevant parts of the model
for each input, thus reducing computational costs. Similarly, structured state space models (SSM) [185] offer
linear-time complexity for sequence modeling, providing
a more efficient alternative to traditional attention mechanisms. At the system level, advanced caching strategies [186] and asynchronous processing techniques [187]
can be implemented to reuse intermediate computations
and parallelize the execution, respectively.
• Ethical, Legal, and Safety Concerns: In practical usages,
the use of LLMs involves complex ethical, legal, and
safety concerns. Data privacy, intellectual property, and
accountability for AI decisions should be carefully discussed. To address these issues, researchers are developing robust frameworks for responsible AI deployment.
At the privacy level, differential privacy techniques [188]
are being implemented to protect individual data during
training and inference. For transparency, efforts focus
on developing interpretable AI systems, allowing stakeholders to audit AI-driven decisions [189]. To enhance
system robustness, adversarial training methods are being
explored to strengthen LLM-RL systems against potential
attacks [190]. Regarding ethical and legal issues, a recent
survey also analyzed potential solutions to integrate ethical standards and societal values into LLM [191].
•

IX. C ONCLUSION
LLMs, with their pre-trained knowledge bases and powerful
capabilities such as reasoning and in-context learning, present
as a viable solution to enhance RL in terms of natural language understanding, multi-task generalization, task planning,
and sample efficiency. In this survey, we have defined this
paradigm as LLM-enhanced RL and summarized its characteristics, together with opportunities and challenges. To formalize
the research scope and methodology of LLM-enhanced RL, we
propose a structured framework to systematically categorize
the roles of LLM based on the functionalities within the
classical agent-environment interaction paradigm. According
to functionalities, we categorize the roles of LLMs into
information processor, reward designer, decision-maker, and
generator. For each category, we review current literature based
on their methods and applications, outline the methodologies,
discuss the addressed issues, and provide insights into future
directions. These are listed below:
• Information Processor: LLMs extract observational representations and formal specification languages for RL

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

agents, thus increasing the sample efficiency. Future
directions include incorporating goal-based information
and integrating multimodal environmental information to
obtain stronger information extraction ability.
• Reward Designer: For intricate or un-quantifiable tasks,
LLMs can leverage pre-trained knowledge to generate
high-performing rewards that are notoriously difficult
for humans to design. Current methods still require
consistently modifying the prompts and instructions of
LLMs, calling for future work on automated self-evolving
frameworks without human intervention.
• Decision-Maker: LLMs generate direct actions or indirect
advice for the agent to improve exploration efficiency.
Huge computational overhead is a major issue in online
interaction. Cost-effective methods to reduce the huge
computational overhead of LLM in online RL is an
important direction.
• Generator: With the generative capability and world
knowledge, LLMs are used as 1) a high-fidelity world
model to reduce real-world learning cost; and 2) a
language-based policy interpreter to explain the agent
policy. Leveraging human instructions to improve the
accuracy and generalizability of the world model and
policy interpreter would be a crucial direction.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[2] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller et al., “Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp.
529–533, 2015.
[3] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[4] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Offpolicy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2018,
pp. 1861–1870.
[5] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik,
J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell et al., “Grandmaster level in starcraft ii
using multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782,
pp. 350–354, 2019.
[6] C. Berner, G. Brockman, B. Chan, V. Cheung, P. Déak, C. Dennison,
D. Farhi, Q. Fischer et al., “Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
[7] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van
Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou et al., “Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature, vol.
529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.
[8] J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, T. Hubert, K. Simonyan, L. Sifre,
S. Schmitt, A. Guez, E. Lockhart et al., “Mastering atari, go,
chess and shogi by planning with a learned model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.08265, 2020.
[9] H. Zhao, Z. Liu, X. Mai, J. Zhao, J. Qiu, G. Liu, Z. Y. Dong, and
A. M. Ghias, “Mobile battery energy storage system control with
knowledge-assisted deep reinforcement learning,” Energy Conversion
and Economics, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 381–391, 2022.
[10] N. B. Schmid, A. Botev, A. Hennig, A. Lerer, Q. Wu, D. Yarats,
J. Foerster, T. Rocktäschel et al., “Rebel: A general game playing ai,”
Science, vol. 373, no. 6556, pp. 664–670, 2021.
[11] N. Brown, A. Lerer, S. Gross, and T. Sandholm, “Superhuman ai for
multiplayer poker,” Science, vol. 365, no. 6456, pp. 885–890, 2020.
[12] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[13] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 25, 2012.

18

[14] Y. Jiang, S. S. Gu, K. P. Murphy, and C. Finn, “Language as an
abstraction for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[15] P. Anderson, Q. Wu, D. Teney, J. Bruce, M. Johnson, N. Sünderhauf,
I. Reid, S. Gould et al., “Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting
visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 3674–3683.
[16] A. Stooke, K. Lee, P. Abbeel, and M. Laskin, “Decoupling representation learning from reinforcement learning,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 9870–9879.
[17] J. Luketina, N. Nardelli, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, J. Andreas, E. Grefenstette, S. Whiteson, and T. Rocktäschel, “A Survey of Reinforcement
Learning Informed by Natural Language,” Jun. 2019.
[18] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni,
L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese et al., “What matters in learning from offline
human demonstrations for robot manipulation,” 2021.
[19] C. Lynch, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, T. Ding, J. Betker, R. Baruch,
T. Armstrong, and P. Florence, “Interactive language: Talking to robots
in real time,” 2022.
[20] Z. Yang, K. Ren, X. Luo, M. Liu, W. Liu, J. Bian, W. Zhang, and
D. Li, “Towards applicable reinforcement learning: Improving the
generalization and sample efficiency with policy ensemble,” in International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248887230
[21] W. B. Knox, A. Allievi, H. Banzhaf, F. Schmitt, and P. Stone, “Reward
(mis) design for autonomous driving,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 316,
p. 103829, 2023.
[22] F. Dworschak, S. Dietze, M. Wittmann, B. Schleich, and S. Wartzack,
“Reinforcement learning for engineering design automation,” Advanced
Engineering Informatics, vol. 52, p. 101612, 2022.
[23] S. Booth, W. B. Knox, J. Shah, S. Niekum, P. Stone, and A. Allievi, “The perils of trial-and-error reward design: misdesign through
overfitting and invalid task specifications,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 5, 2023, pp. 5920–
5929.
[24] L. L. Di Langosco, J. Koch, L. D. Sharkey, J. Pfau, and D. Krueger,
“Goal misgeneralization in deep reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 12 004–
12 019.
[25] R. Yang, X. Sun, and K. Narasimhan, “A generalized algorithm for
multi-objective reinforcement learning and policy adaptation,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[26] J. Luketina, N. Nardelli, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, J. Andreas,
E. Grefenstette, S. Whiteson, and T. Rocktäschel, “A survey of reinforcement learning informed by natural language,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.03926, 2019.
[27] J. Devlin, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[28] A. Radford and K. Narasimhan, “Improving language understanding
by generative pre-training,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49313245
[29] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam et al., “Language models are few-shot
learners,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33,
pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[30] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts,
P. Barham, H. W. Chung et al., “Palm: Scaling language modeling with
pathways,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 24, no. 240,
pp. 1–113, 2023.
[31] A. J. Thirunavukarasu, D. S. J. Ting, K. Elangovan, L. Gutierrez, T. F.
Tan, and D. S. W. Ting, “Large language models in medicine,” Nature
medicine, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1930–1940, 2023.
[32] D. A. Boiko, R. MacKnight, B. Kline, and G. Gomes, “Autonomous
chemical research with large language models,” Nature, vol. 624, no.
7992, pp. 570–578, 2023.
[33] G. Jiang, Z. Ma, L. Zhang, and J. Chen, “Eplus-llm: A large language
model-based computing platform for automated building energy modeling,” Applied Energy, vol. 367, p. 123431, 2024.
[34] H. Tan, Z. Guo, Z. Lin, Y. Chen, D. Huang, W. Yuan, H. Zhang, and
J. Yan, “General generative ai-based image augmentation method for
robust rooftop pv segmentation,” Applied Energy, vol. 368, p. 123554,
2024.
[35] X. Zhou, H. Zhao, Y. Cheng, Y. Cao, G. Liang, G. Liu, and J. Zhao,
“Elecbench: a power dispatch evaluation benchmark for large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05365, 2024.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

[36] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023, pp. 9493–9500.
[37] T. Webb, K. J. Holyoak, and H. Lu, “Emergent analogical reasoning
in large language models,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 7, no. 9, pp.
1526–1541, 2023.
[38] J. Wei, J. Wei, Y. Tay, D. Tran, A. Webson, Y. Lu, X. Chen, H. Liu
et al., “Larger language models do in-context learning differently,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.
[39] J. Huang and K. C.-C. Chang, “Towards reasoning in large language
models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10403, 2022.
[40] J. Yu, X. Wang, S. Tu, S. Cao, D. Zhang-Li, X. Lv, H. Peng,
Z. Yao et al., “Kola: Carefully benchmarking world knowledge of large
language models,” 2023.
[41] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay,
D. Fox, J. Thomason et al., “Progprompt: program generation for
situated robot task planning using large language models,” Autonomous
Robots, pp. 1–14, 2023.
[42] N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. M. Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. Voss,
A. Radford, D. Amodei et al., “Learning to summarize from human
feedback,” 2022.
[43] E. Akyürek, D. Schuurmans, J. Andreas, T. Ma, and D. Zhou, “What
learning algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear
models,” 2023.
[44] Y. Du, O. Watkins, Z. Wang, C. Colas, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, A. Gupta,
and J. Andreas, “Guiding Pretraining in Reinforcement Learning with
Large Language Models,” Sep. 2023.
[45] T. Carta, C. Romac, T. Wolf, S. Lamprier, O. Sigaud, and P.-Y. Oudeyer,
“Grounding Large Language Models in Interactive Environments with
Online Reinforcement Learning,” Sep. 2023.
[46] J. Lin, Y. Du, O. Watkins, D. Hafner, P. Abbeel, D. Klein, and
A. Dragan, “Learning to Model the World with Language,” Jul. 2023.
[47] H. Li, X. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, X. Wang, H. Li
et al., “Auto mc-reward: Automated dense reward design with large
language models for minecraft,” 2023.
[48] S. Chakraborty, K. Weerakoon, P. Poddar, M. Elnoor, P. Narayanan,
C. Busart, P. Tokekar, A. S. Bedi et al., “RE-MOVE: An Adaptive
Policy Design for Robotic Navigation Tasks in Dynamic Environments
via Language-Based Feedback,” Sep. 2023.
[49] J.-C. Pang, X.-Y. Yang, S.-H. Yang, and Y. Yu, “Natural languageconditioned reinforcement learning with inside-out task language
development and translation,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2302.09368
[50] D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, P. Pastor, J. Ibarz, A. Herzog, E. Jang,
D. Quillen, E. Holly et al., “Qt-opt: Scalable deep reinforcement
learning for vision-based robotic manipulation,” 2018.
[51] K. Wang, B. Kang, J. Shao, and J. Feng, “Improving generalization
in reinforcement learning with mixture regularization,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 7968–7978, 2020.
[52] R. Devidze, P. Kamalaruban, and A. Singla, “Exploration-guided
reward shaping for reinforcement learning under sparse rewards,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 5829–
5842, 2022.
[53] A. Singh, L. Yang, K. Hartikainen, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “End-toend robotic reinforcement learning without reward engineering,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.07854, 2019.
[54] D. Hadfield-Menell, S. Milli, P. Abbeel, S. J. Russell, and A. Dragan,
“Inverse reward design,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[55] C. Xiao, Y. Wu, C. Ma, D. Schuurmans, and M. Müller, “Learning
to combat compounding-error in model-based reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11206, 2019.
[56] T. M. Moerland, J. Broekens, A. Plaat, C. M. Jonker et al., “Modelbased reinforcement learning: A survey,” Foundations and Trends® in
Machine Learning, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–118, 2023.
[57] M. Cho, J. Park, S. Lee, and Y. Sung, “Hard tasks first: Multitask reinforcement learning through task scheduling,” in Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=haUOhXo70o
[58] J. Feng, M. Chen, Z. Pu, T. Qiu, and J. Yi, “Efficient multi-task
reinforcement learning via task-specific action correction,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05950
[59] L. Sun, H. Zhang, W. Xu, and M. Tomizuka, “Paco: Parametercompositional multi-task reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 21 495–21 507, 2022.

19

[60] G. Zhang, A. Jain, I. Hwang, S.-H. Sun, and J. J. Lim, “Efficient
multi-task reinforcement learning via selective behavior sharing,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=LYGHdwyXUb
[61] N. Vithayathil Varghese and Q. H. Mahmoud, “A survey of multi-task
deep reinforcement learning,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 9, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/9/1363
[62] T. Xiao, H. Chan, P. Sermanet, A. Wahid, A. Brohan, K. Hausman,
S. Levine, and J. Tompson, “Robotic Skill Acquisition via Instruction
Augmentation with Vision-Language Models,” Jul. 2023.
[63] H. Yuan, C. Zhang, H. Wang, F. Xie, P. Cai, H. Dong, and Z. Lu,
“Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for open-world
minecraft tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16563, 2023.
[64] J. Rocamonde, V. Montesinos, E. Nava, E. Perez, and D. Lindner,
“Vision-Language Models are Zero-Shot Reward Models for Reinforcement Learning,” Oct. 2023.
[65] A. Vaswani, N. M. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13756489
[66] M. Shanahan, “Talking about large language models,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/2212.03551, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:254366666
[67] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal et al., “Llama: Open and
efficient foundation language models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2302.13971,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
257219404
[68] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. J. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess,
R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford et al., “Scaling laws for neural language
models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2001.08361, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:210861095
[69] J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai,
E. Rutherford, D. de Las Casas, L. A. Hendricks et al., “Training
compute-optimal large language models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2203.15556,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
247778764
[70] J. Wei, Y. Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Raffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud,
D. Yogatama, M. Bosma et al., “Emergent abilities of large language
models,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2022, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249674500
[71] V. Sanh, A. Webson, C. Raffel, S. H. Bach, L. Sutawika, Z. Alyafeai,
A. Chaffin, A. Stiegler et al., “Multitask prompted training enables
zero-shot task generalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.
[72] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin,
C. Zhang, S. Agarwal et al., “Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback,” 2022.
[73] Y. Cheng, H. Zhao, X. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y. Cao, and C. Yang, “Gaia–
a large language model for advanced power dispatch,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.03847, 2024.
[74] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi,
Q. Le et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” 2023.
[75] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and
K. Narasimhan, “Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with
large language models,” 2023.
[76] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, L. Gianinazzi,
J. Gajda, T. Lehmann, M. Podstawski et al., “Graph of thoughts:
Solving elaborate problems with large language models,” 2023.
[77] Z. Rao, Y. Wu, Z. Yang, W. Zhang, S. Lu, W. Lu, and Z. Zha, “Visual
navigation with multiple goals based on deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32,
no. 12, pp. 5445–5455, 2021.
[78] C. Huang, R. Zhang, M. Ouyang, P. Wei, J. Lin, J. Su, and L. Lin,
“Deductive reinforcement learning for visual autonomous urban driving
navigation,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 5379–5391, 2021.
[79] M. Yang, W. Huang, W. Tu, Q. Qu, Y. Shen, and K. Lei, “Multitask
learning and reinforcement learning for personalized dialog generation: An empirical study,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and
learning systems, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 49–62, 2020.
[80] Z. He, J. Li, F. Wu, H. Shi, and K.-S. Hwang, “Derl: Coupling
decomposition in action space for reinforcement learning task,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2023.
[81] Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Hou, J. Yuan, J. Tian, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi
et al., “A survey of visual transformers,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

[82] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Jayaraman,
Y. Zhu, L. Fan et al., “Eureka: Human-Level Reward Design via
Coding Large Language Models,” Oct. 2023.
[83] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David,
C. Finn, C. Fu et al., “Do As I Can, Not As I Say: Grounding Language
in Robotic Affordances,” Aug. 2022.
[84] K. Nottingham, P. Ammanabrolu, A. Suhr, Y. Choi, H. Hajishirzi,
S. Singh, and R. Fox, “Do Embodied Agents Dream of Pixelated Sheep:
Embodied Decision Making using Language Guided World Modelling,”
Apr. 2023.
[85] A. Srinivas, M. Laskin, and P. Abbeel, “CURL: Contrastive Unsupervised Representations for Reinforcement Learning,” Sep. 2020.
[86] M. Schwarzer, A. Anand, R. Goel, R. D. Hjelm, A. Courville, and
P. Bachman, “Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive
representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05929, 2020.
[87] F. Paischer, T. Adler, V. Patil, A. Bitto-Nemling, M. Holzleitner,
S. Lehner, H. Eghbal-zadeh, and S. Hochreiter, “History Compression
via Language Models in Reinforcement Learning,” Feb. 2023.
[88] F. Paischer, T. Adler, M. Hofmarcher, and S. Hochreiter, “Semantic
helm: A human-readable memory for reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[89] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[90] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, Q. V. Le, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length
context,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.02860
[91] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
[92] W. K. Kim, S. Kim, H. Woo et al., “Efficient policy adaptation with
contrastive prompt ensemble for embodied agents,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[93] R. P. Poudel, H. Pandya, S. Liwicki, and R. Cipolla, “Recore:
Regularized contrastive representation learning of world model,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 22 904–22 913.
[94] S. Basavatia, K. Murugesan, and S. Ratnakar, “Starling: Self-supervised
training of text-based reinforcement learning agent with large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05872, 2024.
[95] R. Patel, E. Pavlick, and S. Tellex, “Grounding language to nonmarkovian tasks with no supervision of task specifications.” in
Robotics: Science and Systems, vol. 2020, 2020.
[96] T. R. Sumers, M. K. Ho, R. D. Hawkins, K. Narasimhan, and T. L.
Griffiths, “Learning rewards from linguistic feedback,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 7, 2021,
pp. 6002–6010.
[97] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as Policies: Language Model Programs for
Embodied Control,” May 2023.
[98] C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao, and Y. Su,
“Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with
large language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 2998–3009.
[99] B. A. Spiegel, Z. Yang, W. Jurayj, B. Bachmann, S. Tellex, and
G. Konidaris, “Informing reinforcement learning agents by grounding
language to markov decision processes,” in Workshop on Training
Agents with Foundation Models at RLC 2024, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=uFm9e4Ly26
[100] B. Gordon, Y. Bitton, Y. Shafir, R. Garg, X. Chen, D. Lischinski,
D. Cohen-Or, and I. Szpektor, “Mismatch quest: Visual and textual
feedback for image-text misalignment,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 2025, pp. 310–328.
[101] Y. Wang, J. He, D. Wang, Q. Wang, B. Wan, and X. Luo, “Multimodal
transformer with adaptive modality weighting for multimodal sentiment
analysis,” Neurocomputing, vol. 572, p. 127181, 2024.
[102] X. Zhao, S. Poria, X. Li, Y. Chen, and B. Tang, “Toward robust
multimodal learning using multimodal foundational models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.13697, 2024.
[103] F. Lygerakis, V. Dave, and E. Rueckert, “M2curl: Sample-efficient
multimodal reinforcement learning via self-supervised representation
learning for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17032,
2024.
[104] J. Eschmann, “Reward function design in reinforcement learning,”
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms: Analysis and Applications, pp.
25–33, 2021.

20

[105] J. Andreas, D. Klein, and S. Levine, “Modular multitask reinforcement
learning with policy sketches,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 166–175.
[106] S. Mirchandani, S. Karamcheti, and D. Sadigh, “Ella: Exploration
through learned language abstraction,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 29 529–29 540, 2021.
[107] M. Kwon, S. M. Xie, K. Bullard, and D. Sadigh, “Reward Design
with Language Models,” in The Eleventh International Conference on
Learning Representations, Sep. 2022.
[108] Y. Wu, Y. Fan, P. P. Liang, A. Azaria, Y. Li, and T. M. Mitchell,
“Read and Reap the Rewards: Learning to Play Atari with the Help of
Instruction Manuals,” Oct. 2023.
[109] K. Chu, X. Zhao, C. Weber, M. Li, and S. Wermter, “Accelerating
Reinforcement Learning of Robotic Manipulations via Feedback from
Large Language Models,” Nov. 2023.
[110] A. Adeniji, A. Xie, C. Sferrazza, Y. Seo, S. James, and P. Abbeel,
“Language reward modulation for pretraining reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12270, 2023.
[111] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled
version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108
[112] C. Kim, Y. Seo, H. Liu, L. Lee, J. Shin, H. Lee, and K. Lee, “Guide
Your Agent with Adaptive Multimodal Rewards,” Oct. 2023.
[113] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and A. Gupta, “R3m: A
universal visual representation for robot manipulation,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.12601
[114] Y. Seo, D. Hafner, H. Liu, F. Liu, S. James, K. Lee, and P. Abbeel,
“Masked World Models for Visual Control,” May 2023.
[115] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar,
J. Hamburger, H. Jiang et al., “Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours
of egocentric video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 18 995–19 012.
[116] Y. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Zhang, Z. Xian, E. Biyik, D. Held,
and Z. Erickson, “Rl-vlm-f: Reinforcement learning from vision
language foundation model feedback,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03681
[117] W. Yu, N. Gileadi, C. Fu, S. Kirmani, K.-H. Lee, M. G. Arenas, H.T. L. Chiang, T. Erez et al., “Language to rewards for robotic skill
synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.
[118] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe,
U. Alon, N. Dziri et al., “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with selffeedback,” 2023.
[119] J. Song, Z. Zhou, J. Liu, C. Fang, Z. Shu, and L. Ma, “Self-Refined
Large Language Model as Automated Reward Function Designer for
Deep Reinforcement Learning in Robotics,” Oct. 2023.
[120] T. Xie, S. Zhao, C. H. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Luo, V. Zhong,
Y. Yang, and T. Yu, “Text2reward: Reward shaping with language
models for reinforcement learning,” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=tUM39YTRxH
[121] E. Ferrara, “Should chatgpt be biased? challenges and risks of bias in
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03738, 2023.
[122] I. O. Gallegos, R. A. Rossi, J. Barrow, M. M. Tanjim, S. Kim,
F. Dernoncourt, T. Yu, R. Zhang et al., “Bias and fairness in large
language models: A survey,” Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–79,
2024.
[123] L. Gao, J. Schulman, and J. Hilton, “Scaling laws for reward model
overoptimization,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and
J. Scarlett, Eds., vol. 202. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023, pp. 10 835–10 866.
[124] S. Chakraborty, A. Bhaskar, A. Singh, P. Tokekar, D. Manocha,
and A. S. Bedi, “Rebel: A regularization-based solution for reward
overoptimization in reinforcement learning from human feedback,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14436, 2023.
[125] A. Radwan, L. Zaafarani, J. Abudawood, F. AlZahrani, and F. Fourat,
“Addressing bias through ensemble learning and regularized finetuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00910, 2024.
[126] Y. Inoue and H. Ohashi, “Prompter: Utilizing large language model
prompting for a data efficient embodied instruction following,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.03267, 2022.
[127] A. Majumdar, A. Shrivastava, S. Lee, P. Anderson, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Improving vision-and-language navigation with image-text
pairs from the web,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VI
16. Springer, 2020, pp. 259–274.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

[128] M. Janner, Q. Li, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning as
one big sequence modeling problem,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 1273–1286, 2021.
[129] S. Li, X. Puig, C. Paxton, Y. Du, C. Wang, L. Fan, T. Chen, D.-A.
Huang et al., “Pre-trained language models for interactive decisionmaking,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 31 199–31 212, 2022.
[130] R. Shi, Y. Liu, Y. Ze, S. S. Du, and H. Xu, “Unleashing the power of
pre-trained language models for offline reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.20587, 2023.
[131] Z. Zeng, C. Zhang, S. Wang, and C. Sun, “Goal-conditioned predictive
coding for offline reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[132] M. Reid, Y. Yamada, and S. S. Gu, “Can Wikipedia Help Offline
Reinforcement Learning?” Jul. 2022.
[133] J. Fu, A. Kumar, O. Nachum, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “D4rl:
Datasets for deep data-driven reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
[134] L. Mezghani, P. Bojanowski, K. Alahari, and S. Sukhbaatar, “Think
before you act: Unified policy for interleaving language reasoning with
actions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11063, 2023.
[135] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia, J. Wu, P. Wohlhart
et al., “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023,
pp. 2165–2183.
[136] S. Yao, R. Rao, M. Hausknecht, and K. Narasimhan, “Keep calm and
explore: Language models for action generation in text-based games,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02903, 2020.
[137] M. Hausknecht, P. Ammanabrolu, M.-A. Côté, and X. Yuan, “Interactive fiction games: A colossal adventure,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 05, 2020, pp. 7903–
7910.
[138] H. Hu and D. Sadigh, “Language Instructed Reinforcement Learning
for Human-AI Coordination,” Jun. 2023.
[139] Z. Zhou, B. Hu, P. Zhang, C. Zhao, and B. Liu, “Large language model
is a good policy teacher for training reinforcement learning agents,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13373, 2023.
[140] M. Dalal, T. Chiruvolu, D. S. Chaplot, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Plan-seq-learn: Language model guided RL for solving long
horizon robotics tasks,” in The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=hQVCCxQrYN
[141] J. Garcıa and F. Fernández, “A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16,
no. 1, pp. 1437–1480, 2015.
[142] H. Xu, X. Zhan, and X. Zhu, “Constraints penalized q-learning for safe
offline reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp. 8753–8760.
[143] J. Lee, C. Paduraru, D. J. Mankowitz, N. Heess, D. Precup, K.-E.
Kim, and A. Guez, “Coptidice: Offline constrained reinforcement learning via stationary distribution correction estimation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.08957, 2022.
[144] Z. Liu, Z. Guo, Y. Yao, Z. Cen, W. Yu, T. Zhang, and D. Zhao, “Constrained decision transformer for offline safe reinforcement learning,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp.
21 611–21 630.
[145] S. Naihin, D. Atkinson, M. Green, M. Hamadi, C. Swift, D. Schonholtz,
A. T. Kalai, and D. Bau, “Testing language model agents safely in the
wild,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10538, 2023.
[146] W. Huang, H. Liu, Z. Huang, and C. Lv, “Safety-aware human-inthe-loop reinforcement learning with shared control for autonomous
driving,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp.
1–12, 2024.
[147] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, E. Berman, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan,
and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement
Learning,” Oct. 2023.
[148] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
2021.
[149] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to Control:
Learning Behaviors by Latent Imagination,” Mar. 2020.
[150] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, M. Norouzi, and J. Ba, “Mastering Atari with
Discrete World Models,” Feb. 2022.
[151] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control:
Learning behaviors by latent imagination,” 2020.

21

[152] Y. Matsuo, Y. LeCun, M. Sahani, D. Precup, D. Silver, M. Sugiyama,
E. Uchibe, and J. Morimoto, “Deep learning, reinforcement learning,
and world models,” Neural Networks, vol. 152, pp. 267–275, 2022.
[153] L. Chen, K. Lu, A. Rajeswaran, K. Lee, A. Grover, M. Laskin,
P. Abbeel, A. Srinivas et al., “Decision transformer: Reinforcement
learning via sequence modeling,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 15 084–15 097, 2021.
[154] V. Micheli, E. Alonso, and F. Fleuret, “Transformers are SampleEfficient World Models,” in The Eleventh International Conference on
Learning Representations, Sep. 2022.
[155] J. Robine, M. Höftmann, T. Uelwer, and S. Harmeling, “Transformerbased World Models Are Happy With 100k Interactions,” Mar. 2023.
[156] C. Chen, Y.-F. Wu, J. Yoon, and S. Ahn, “TransDreamer: Reinforcement Learning with Transformer World Models,” Feb. 2022.
[157] Y. Seo, K. Lee, S. James, and P. Abbeel, “Reinforcement Learning
with Action-Free Pre-Training from Videos,” Jun. 2022.
[158] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, I. Fischer, R. Villegas, D. Ha, H. Lee, and
J. Davidson, “Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels,” in
International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2019, pp.
2555–2565.
[159] R. P. K. Poudel, H. Pandya, C. Zhang, and R. Cipolla, “LanGWM:
Language Grounded World Model,” Nov. 2023.
[160] S. Milani, N. Topin, M. Veloso, and F. Fang, “A survey of explainable
reinforcement learning,” 2022.
[161] D. Das, S. Chernova, and B. Kim, “State2explanation: Concept-based
explanations to benefit agent learning and user understanding,”
in Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
xGz0wAIJrS
[162] J. Lin, Y. Du, O. Watkins, D. Hafner, P. Abbeel, D. Klein, and
A. Dragan, “Learning to model the world with language,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.01399, 2023.
[163] W. Lu, X. Zhao, S. Magg, M. Gromniak, M. Li, and S. Wermterl,
“A closer look at reward decomposition for high-level robotic explanations,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Development and
Learning (ICDL). IEEE, 2023, pp. 429–436.
[164] C. Yu, J. Liu, S. Nemati, and G. Yin, “Reinforcement learning in
healthcare: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 55, no. 1,
pp. 1–36, 2021.
[165] S. Agashe, Y. Fan, and X. E. Wang, “Evaluating multi-agent
coordination abilities in large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03903, 2023.
[166] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.10062, 2023.
[167] O. Slumbers, D. H. Mguni, K. Shao, and J. Wang, “Leveraging large
language models for optimised coordination in textual multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” 2023.
[168] C. Sun, S. Huang, and D. Pompili, “Llm-based multi-agent reinforcement learning: Current and future directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.11106, 2024.
[169] J. Lee, A. Xie, A. Pacchiano, Y. Chandak, C. Finn, O. Nachum, and
E. Brunskill, “Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 36, 2024.
[170] Z. Buçinca, S. Swaroop, A. E. Paluch, S. A. Murphy, and K. Z.
Gajos, “Towards optimizing human-centric objectives in ai-assisted
decision-making with offline reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05911, 2024.
[171] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal,
H. Küttler, M. Lewis et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401
[172] L. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “A comprehensive survey of
continual learning: theory, method and application,” IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
[173] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen,
J. Tang et al., “A survey on large language model based autonomous
agents,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 186345, 2024.
[174] Y. Cheng, C. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Meng, S. Hong, W. Li, Z. Wang,
Z. Wang et al., “Exploring large language model based intelligent agents: Definitions, methods, and prospects,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.03428, 2024.
[175] C. B. Browne, E. Powley, D. Whitehouse, S. M. Lucas, P. I. Cowling,
P. Rohlfshagen, S. Tavener, D. Perez et al., “A survey of monte carlo
tree search methods,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence
and AI in games, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2012.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. X, NO. X, XXX 2024

[176] Z. Zhang, X. Bo, C. Ma, R. Li, X. Chen, Q. Dai, J. Zhu, Z. Dong et al.,
“A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based
agents,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13501
[177] S. G. Patil, T. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Gorilla:
Large language model connected with massive apis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
[178] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, C. Hesse,
S. Jain et al., “Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with
human feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[179] Y. Talebirad and A. Nadiri, “Multi-agent collaboration: Harnessing
the power of intelligent llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03314,
2023.
[180] Z. Lin, S. Trivedi, and J. Sun, “Generating with confidence:
Uncertainty quantification for black-box large language models,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19187
[181] R. S. Y. C. Tan, Q. Lin, G. H. Low, R. Lin, T. C. Goh, C. C. E.
Chang, F. F. Lee, W. Y. Chan et al., “Inferring cancer disease response
from radiology reports using large language models with data augmentation and prompting,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1657–1664, 2023.
[182] Q. Gao, C. Zhao, Y. Sun, T. Xi, G. Zhang, B. Ghanem, and J. Zhang, “A
unified continual learning framework with general parameter-efficient
tuning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 11 483–11 493.
[183] W. Zhou, Y. E. Jiang, R. Cotterell, and M. Sachan, “Efficient
prompting via dynamic in-context learning,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11170
[184] Z.-F. Gao, P. Liu, W. X. Zhao, Z.-Y. Lu, and J.-R. Wen, “Parameterefficient mixture-of-experts architecture for pre-trained language
models,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.01104
[185] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling
with selective state spaces,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752
[186] L. D. Corro, A. D. Giorno, S. Agarwal, B. Yu, A. Awadallah,
and S. Mukherjee, “Skipdecode: Autoregressive skip decoding with
batching and caching for efficient llm inference,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02628
[187] Y. Chen, Z. han Ding, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, and S. Liu,
“Asynchronous large language model enhanced planner for autonomous
driving,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14556
[188] Z. Charles, A. Ganesh, R. McKenna, H. B. McMahan, N. Mitchell,
K. Pillutla, and K. Rush, “Fine-tuning large language models
with user-level differential privacy,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07737
[189] E. Cambria, L. Malandri, F. Mercorio, N. Nobani, and A. Seveso,
“Xai meets llms: A survey of the relation between explainable
ai and large language models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2407.15248
[190] S. Xhonneux, A. Sordoni, S. Günnemann, G. Gidel, and L. Schwinn,
“Efficient adversarial training in llms with continuous attacks,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15589
[191] C. Deng, Y. Duan, X. Jin, H. Chang, Y. Tian, H. Liu, H. P. Zou,
Y. Jin et al., “Deconstructing the ethics of large language models from
long-standing issues to new-emerging dilemmas,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05392

22

